## The Building Blocks of Today’s and Tomorrow’s Language Models - Sebastian Raschka, RAIR Lab

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nDl6Aj9aPAI

Yeah. Hi everyone. Thank you for coming. Um, yeah, I know there's been some rescheduling of this talk, so I'm glad everyone made this. And yeah, I'm happy to be here finally. I'm a bit late, but better late than never. So um yeah, I'm also um a bit rusty. It's been a year since my last talk. So I hope uh to make it interesting though. So today I wanted to talk about the building blocks of today's and tomorrow's LLMs. And so this talk is a 25 minute talk. So I can't cover everything but I thought um so the goal of this talk is to catch you up with all the let's say the main interesting building blocks of LLMs this year. Um so what has happened this year so there's a lot going on as you know when you go on social media on the news there is almost uh every day a new LLM a new method coming out. So I try to uh focus on the most essential ones. So here uh in this talk I will first cover the um LLM landscape in 2025 just focusing only on this year mainly because yeah otherwise we would have like a week-l long session. Um so I try to capture the developments in a graphic here. So the main LLMs since earlier this year I'm cheating a little bit because I'm also having OMO 2 here and DeepSeek version 3 on the left hand side and they came out end of 2024 but it's like roughly let's say a year from today. Um and these are also just the most notable LLMs today. The open weight LLMs that most people use from let's say Almo and DeepSync version 3 up to GLM 4.6 six. Of course, maybe there were already some new models coming out yesterday that I missed, but these I would say are the mo most interesting, most widely used ones. And then I will later on also talk about some alternatives. So this uh is almost like a very empty slide. I will make it a bit more crowded later on. But um yeah so the main theme this year in terms of LLMs uh what LLMs are focusing on in terms of the architecture is uh yeah making the models bigger. So for example the trend was almost started with deepseek version 3 going to 671 billion parameters and then Kim K2 with a trillion parameters and so forth. So making models bigger but then at the same time uh people you know like more and more people use LLM. The focus has also shifted more and more towards how we make them more efficient like uh lowering the inference costs to be able to use uh models with trillion parameters and also uh using like having a lot of customers using these um LLMs for example when we deploy LLMs. So I wanted to introduce some core building blocks. One of them is grouped query attention. So this is an older technique that came out in 2023. This was already used by Llama 2 back then. So it's not a new technique. It's just here as a gentle introduction to some of the motivations of some of the other building blocks. So I highlighted um the LLMs that are using grouped query attention here from from Gemma 3 to GLM 4.6. So it is still a pretty widely used technique and uh where it sits in the LLM. So this is a very crowded um image of Quen 3 LM. I just picked one of the many LLMs, but the structure of the LMS is almost always pretty identical. And in the center, we have this transformer block that is repeated a couple of times. And in this transformer block, there's this uh attention mechanism, multi head attention. And grouped query attention or GQA is essentially an alternative to the standard multi head attention block. Again not a new technique just a gentle introduction to how we can make things more efficient. So on the left hand side it is a regular multi head attention where we have uh queries keys and values. So uh because it's 20 minutes I won't go over let's say the details of how this is internally computed what we do with the keys and values and queries but the message is here that we have a value and a key for each query. And then group query attention is an idea. It's like how can we um let's say I wouldn't say cheat but how can we approximate this a bit to make this more efficient. For example, instead of having a key and value for every query, we only for example on the right hand side have a key and value for every second query. So here we are now having the numbers of keys and values. And the idea is essentially nowadays um almost every LLM in inference mode uses something called a KV cache. And the KV cache is caching old keys and values from previous words. So LMS are generating one word at a time. And uh to avoid recomputing redundant keys and values that we reuse, we can store them in a cache. And this cache becomes really long at some point if we have these long um inputs. So the idea is how can we reduce the KV cache and so and that is by sharing more keys and values among these queries. Just one little trick basically. And if we do it just right, so we could go to an extreme case where we have only one key and value for all the queries. This would be called multiquery attention. But this is almost too extreme because then the model will perform worse. It's too much of an exp approximation. So there is in practice like a sweet spot between how much do we want to share but also how much do we want to approximate. It's like a trade-off between uh compute resources and modeling performance essentially. And so here I plotted this um it's maybe a bit small. So the so basically on the y-axis what we have is the KV cache size in gigabytes. And we want this to be small basically to just save costs in inference mode. And so the blue uh at the top the blue um line the graph is the regular multi head attention mechanism how much it would costs with increasing sequence length. So on the x-axis we make the sequence sequence length longer and we can see it becomes much more expensive as we make the sequence longer and with group query attention there are different hyperparameters different group sizes we can lower this um KV cache size so that's one of the many tricks that has been around for yeah almost maybe two and a half years now people are using that it's not a new technique um but it's I think a gentle introduction to the idea how we make things more efficient And so um another idea was multi head latent attention. So this is something that was introduced by deepseek version two. So before version three version two came out in 2024 and instead of using this group query attention mechanism the deepseek team came up with multi head latent attention and Kim K2 is another LLM using that and so here this is also the same idea. How can we reduce the KVK cache size but with a another approach basically. So here what we are looking at is um on the left hand side the deepse version 3 architecture and um on the right hand side is just like for reference the regular multi head attention module where we have an input and then for each input token we have um transformation a query key and value matrix that computes these query key and values and this is just uh how regular attention works. We have these three weight matrices in multi head latent attention. We have four weight matrices now. So it sounds like okay we are making things more complicated and more expensive by having yet another transformation. But the trick here is and so again the idea is to reduce the KV cache size. So instead of having these keys and values that we add to the KV cache, we now have in blue in this center here, we have this compressed version like a latent representation that is smaller and then we store only this latent representation in the KV cache size and during inference when we then generate the next token we have these additional two weight matrices to up project to reconstruct the keys and values. It's almost if you're familiar with the technique Laura, it's kind of like a similar idea where we have uh we project something into a smaller space and then up project it again. So it's like a a little trick to reduce the thing we want to store in the KV cache here, the latent representation. It's like a compressed um key and value. And similar if we look at a chart, similar to grouped query attention, we can bring down the KV cache size with this technique. And I chose the hyperparameters here. So if you would take the previous plot, you can perfectly overlay it. You get exactly the same savings. Um so I wanted to show this is essentially an alternative to using grouped query attention. Interestingly, you could also combine those two. So you could use group query attention and MLA together. I mean there's no reason why you couldn't. It's uh two how people say orthogonal techniques. You can combine them. And again it's a hyperparameter. how much you want to compress, how much you want to save. The interesting part though is in the DeepSeek version 3 paper, they found for example that if you use um MLA with a similar compression like or similar savings as grouped query attention, the modeling performance will be better. The trade-off is it's a bit more complicated because we have these intermediate states. So you have to rewrite a bit of your inference pipeline because we now have to store this um latent state instead of the regular keys and values. an interesting alternative to the grouped query attention mechanism. Um another one another trick is um sliding window attention. So um again the idea is to save costs also um again reducing the KV cache size and so here I highlighted also only two models Gemma 3 and Mistral 3.1 and Mistrol 3.1 is not as far as I know even really using that. So if you go to the hugging face model hub where most companies these days upload their open weight models and if you go to the mistrol 3.1 model you will see they have an option for sliding window attention but it's disabled by default. So uh there is also though a gguf weight version of that where it is enabled. So it's hard to say whether uh personally I I don't know whether they trained with sliding window attention or not. And you can use it uh like it's your own choice if you want to use it or not. Um so what is um sliding window attention? Um so here it's on the left hand side the classic causal self attention mask of the multi head attention mechanism where um each token attends to the current position and everything that comes before it. So that's how you come up with this um auto reggressive causal uh mask basically where you generate one token at a time but the model can't look into the future. Um with sliding window attention it's the same idea but you additionally um restrict how far back the model can look. So you have like a band here where you can say okay uh each token can look back not to the very beginning but maybe only uh a certain number of tokens. on the right hand side it's three tokens. So instead of looking if we look at the bottom row instead of looking at all the six tokens we only look at the current token and three or two tokens before it. And so it's again like a trick to reduce the compute cost but it's again also an approximation. So we are basically trading off um what the model can see with computational complexity. Um here is a chart where I plotted it again um in terms of costs. At the top is again a multi head um the regular multi head attention mechanism and then I don't know if you can see it but there's a dotted line the blue dotted line. So they are dots and you can see this is like uh the sliding window attention version of this multi head attention mechanism and it is saving again KV cache um storage and another interesting thing to add here is you can also again combine this with grouped query attention and that is for example what Gemma 3 is doing so in in orange here that's the grouped query attention mechanism and the orange dotted line is the sliding window attention together with root query attention. So it's yet again another trick. Um and I should maybe also say in addition to that um you usually don't only use multi head attention or sliding window attention in these architectures. Um in Gemma 3 for example they had five sliding window attention layers followed by a regular multihead attention layer then again five sliding window attention layers. So um going back one slide. So most of the time the model has a limited context that the model can see but some of the layers can see everything and so in this sense you can still capture the whole context and based on ablation studies in the paper they found that this gives you almost the same um modeling accuracy as regular multi head attention um yeah and so I should have maybe included more slides to make this uh more let's say obvious but it is a 20inut talk after all so I try to focus maybe on the main ideas here and maybe the most important idea of this year or not it didn't uh it wasn't invented this year but the most prominent technique that everyone almost everyone adopted this year is a mixture of experts so uh I highlighted in bold all the models that use mixture of experts modules and so this is again another trick to save um interest inference costs on the left hand side I have an architecture that um roughly resembles deepseek version But I made this up because this is just a regular dense model. So dense means it's not using mixture of experts. And so what I highlighted here or what this uh box on the right hand side is is the feed forward module of this architecture. And the idea in mixture of experts is to replace this feed forward block by many feed forward blocks. So in deepseek version 3 they replaced one feed forward module by 256 of them. But so you're making essentially the model larger but uh even though you make the model much much larger you try not to increase the number of parameters that is used in each inference step. So the idea is um during training the model has now more capacity to take up more knowledge from the training data set but you still keep the inference cost the same as with the model that doesn't use mixture of experts. So on the right hand side um even though the model has now 256 feed forward modules you only use nine of them in each step and so there's a router module and based on a given token the router it's a little multi-layer perceptron it learns which uh which of these layers to use and in this case in deepseek version 3 they used one shared expert that is always active plus eight that are selected. So the idea of the shared expert is to avoid learning redundancy. So for example the expert might learn um how to process or how how to interpret language for example. And so in this case if you have a shared expert you avoid each other expert to relearn the same knowledge and the other experts they can specialize maybe one expert is more geared towards to uh code tasks one is more geared towards let's say Spanish one is more for for math uh it's implicit so it's not like an explicit expert that is only doing coding but the idea is essentially that the router can decide given the task what to route for and in this sense you we can uh increase the capacity without limit without increasing the inference cost. Uh for example uh in in the bottom right uh the numbers here are in deepseek version 3 we have 671 billion parameters in total but at each inference step only 37 billion parameters are used. So it's 20 times less of the parameters are used than are available. So uh the main idea basically and here uh I did another plot for example um the the straight line the horizontal line here that's the active uh parameters in each inference step uh for the dense layer and also um basically how many let's say how many parameters this model has but then if we use mixture of experts we can see we reduce the number of active parameters the more experts we have basically so it's like an idea um if if we have a fixed number of experts that we use eight but we increase the number of experts in total we bring down the number of active parameters so it's it's one of the most widely used um techniques this year um so I realized so this is uh only a 20-minute talk so we can't go into all the nitty-gritty details in terms of ablation studies and different design choices and everything but I have a blog article where uh it's probably too many words maybe 8 9,000 words where I um was elaborating a little bit more with figures and uh numbers and paper references. So if you're interested, I also made a short link um ahead of ai.com which just forwards to my blog because that's easier to spell than my first and last name. So yeah, if you want to read more about these different architecture designs this year can find out more in this blog post. And uh yeah in the talk abstract that I submitted to the pytorch conference I also mentioned I wanted to briefly mention some other um alternative architectures. So so far we covered broadly these models at the top. These are the conventional decoder style transformers. And today, if I were to implement an LLM for an important implication, even like a chatbot for a customer, I think my go-to would always be one of those models still. They also come in different sizes because they are the ones that so far stood the test of time. They perform very well and you have a range of different model sizes. So, that's something I would always consider as a first thing. And then if you are feeling uh uh like oh I should do some experiments I should compare it to some other models maybe make things more efficient make the accuracy better there are some interesting developments that are maybe worth taking a look they're very experimental at this stage but um I'm just saying there are people working on things that are not these classic decoder style transformers I just talked about. So for example, just off the main branch, there are a few flavors now that are very similar. So there are still um Dakota style transformers, but they have a few tweaks. For example, um Quen 3 Next um is a model that uses a gated delta net in I think in every other um or it's a 3:1 ratio layer where they have a more efficient alternative to the attention mechanism for example or um DeepS version 3.2 too experimental is another architecture that came out recently where they use a sparse attention mechanism and the idea I mean the models work the same as the other ones except they are even more efficient so they're trading off some uh absolute modeling accuracy by making things more efficient by uh approximations. So these are some that recently emerged quen 3 next and Deepseek version 3.2 too. Um I also was tempted to put a DeepSseek um OCR on there, but you know it's not really um I would say u an attention hybrid model that would fit in here, but it's another interesting uh development more like for research purposes. So um another hot topic uh was basically the hierarchical reasoning model. And so this made a big splash because it achieved really good performance on this ARC benchmark. Um it's basically a puzzle uh almost like an IQ test these types of puzzles where you have to arrange blocks uh given some examples and there was recently a new version of that or like a more a simpler and more efficient version called tiny reasoning model and this also it was a very very popular um model that was discussed everywhere. I I think it's a really cool direction but um one thing I wanted to highlight is it's something worth looking into but it is not a language model in that sense. I mean it's a transformer but it can't parse language at least not yet it's more for puzzles special purpose and I can see these models being used at some point as part you know like when as part of other models when you do function calling when you have an LLM and you want to solve a specific problem you can use a calculator you can use a search engine and I can envision these uh tiny reasoning models hierarchical reasoning models being like one of these uh models that are being called as part of uh yeah an ensemble of other models basically um world models. So world models started out with or in the vision domain, computer vision domain basically. But there was uh one model I think it was earlier this year even um code world model I think it was by meta and this was also a really cool approach where um the idea here was essentially instead of just training a code model uh code uh so world models are simulating the world as they see it or process it in a sense it's like an abstract um simulation of let's say a physical world in this case it would be specific to code where instead of just uh doing next token prediction, the model also looks at code traces. So if you have code, you have intermediate variables and so forth, the model also learns those. It adds a bit more um complexity during training, but uh the paper was very promising. It's it's a very new approach. I I think there's only one model out there right now, 32 billion parameters, but this is I think I would bet it's one of the more interesting ones to pursue. um it adds more complexity but I think it uh looks very promising to make let's say transformers better on coding tasks even uh text diffusion models also a hot topic so there were lots of papers this year on text diffusion models an alternative to the auto reggressive language modeling so instead of generating one token at a time uh text diffusion models they generate all the tokens at the same time essentially but then there are uh iterations like uh you probably know um diffusion models from stable diffusion. This was like a company and they developed open weight models that made diffusion models popular a few years ago where um you have an image and then you den noiseise the image and this is the same idea for text except the text is discrete. Um without having a figure here, I think the easiest way to think about it is if you are familiar with masked language modeling like in Bird, the BERT bird model, it's uh you're masking out tokens and then you're trying to reconstruct it and you do it in in this diffusion case. You do it then multiple times. It's like doing bird multiple times with this masking. uh you generate all the tokens at the same time which is great because it sounds like okay we are now parallelizing the text generation which is usually pretty slow in um in large language models but then the downside is for example you wouldn't be able to take um advantage of things like reasoning where you have a reasoning chain that can enhance the modeling performance because you are generating everything in parallel. I realize I only have one minute left, so I wanted to just highlight a few others. Uh, liquid foundation models based on partial differential equations. Um, transformer RNN hybrids, there was just a new RWKV paper. Uh, it's like a RNN transformer hybrid. And then of course all the state space models. It's also very important uh interesting direction that the state space models coming from pure state space models are kind of being more hybrids now also with our attention mechanisms. So yeah there's a lot of interesting stuff going on also even LSTMs got new revisions like XLSTM which is um not quite as good as transformers but is very efficient for uh for example ondevice applications. So um each of those could be essentially another 20 minute talk maybe two hour talk. So um I don't want to keep you too long because I have >> Oh yeah. [laughter] Um yeah so I wish though I could I mean I was planning with 25 minutes I had then more figures and images. So but I think yeah this is um just highlighting the ecosystem the LLM ecosystem this year and all the interesting alternatives that are being developed. Like I mentioned before, personally I would still start at the top with one of those models and then if you are experimental, you know, um looking a little bit beyond the usual suspects, there's a lot of also interesting other work going on. Um yeah, and so I was planning to also write this up nicely as maybe a longer article because yeah, it's only a 20-minute talk. So maybe in the upcoming weeks when I'm back uh home in my office, I will work on writing a blog article. So keep an eye out where I will go into more detail um in terms of how these other modeling variants work. Um I wanted to say also the PyTorch conference is organizing a book signing session and yeah uh has a bunch of books uh here on site. So um I'm honored to be invited to sign them. So, if you are around and you are interested in uh yeah, copy of my book, Build a Large Language Model from Scratch, it will be in the expo hall at 3:20 p.m. Um, so maybe a bit earlier even uh let's say 320 3:10 3:20 p.m. I will be there uh signing a few books if you are interested in that. So, the book is about building a large language model from scratch, a very small language model, but it is capable. It's a real language model. uh um same architecture that I showed you. It's like to basically understand really how it works because yeah building something is in my opinion the best way to make sure you understand concept compared to just looking at images uh doing the actual work in code is the real thing basically um I'm also working on a new book build a reasoning model from scratch which is essentially a sequel of the previous book it works as a standalone book but is essentially starting with a pre-trained model and then implementing um uh evaluation methods inference scaling and reinforcement learning for building reasoning models. So if you're interested, it's currently also available in this early access program here at Manning. So yeah, if you are interested in something to read after building a large language model, how to make it better on reasoning. Um yeah, keep an eye out for that. And um with that, yeah, this is everything I had for today. I think we have a few minutes for questions. um if the organizers don't kick me out here. So yeah, thanks everyone for attending and I will also be around and later at the book signing session. So yeah, thank you everyone. >> Mhm. Yeah. So the question is how I see the training stack being different from the inference stack and then from the uh reasoning stack. I think yeah the training is uh also getting more complicated multiple stages uh pre-training mid-training post-training lots of things but in the end you get a model that you can then use during inference and um the difference is for example inference you have a lot of additional techniques for example the KV cache I mentioned many times before in this talk this would be something you don't worry about during pre pre-turning but it comes in then during um during inference and then quantization a lot of different techniques you apply to the model to make it more efficient. Reasoning is interesting because the reasoning you kind of have to decide uh where you want to start. You can start in the um training stage. You add another training stage like reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards is the most popular one right now. To make the model into a reasoning model, for example, from Deepseek version 3 into DeepSc R1, it's essentially just more training. But then you can also not worry about training at all and you can do inference time scaling. There was uh last week an an interesting paper based on MCMC that found that with um the right inference time scaling. So what they did is something like beam search but with um resampling you can get the same performance as with reinforcement learning but you don't have to reinforcement learn. It's tricky though because I think which one you want to do depends on what your application is because you're trading off training time with inference costs. So reasoning is usually making the model more expensive because it generates more tokens or you have more sampling going on. And then if you are a company, you have millions of customers, it might be easier and cheaper to just train the model more. And then don't do that much inference time scaling in addition to that because inference time scaling like resampling adds costs in each iteration. If you're a small lab though maybe you don't have the budget to do reinforcement learning so you do this um resampling during during um inference. So it's like a interesting interplay and I don't think there's a right approach. It really depends on the context. But yeah good question long answer. I hope that answered it though. Uh yeah. So I saw the first tent here in models like small models that are can be hosted on like edge devices. So kind of like live training either fine tuning or just on the device. >> Yeah. So the question is um if there are uh examples of small models that are being trained on device. >> To be honest I don't know off the top of my head. So uh I know for example Apple is using these very small models on device and they have been trained with Laura. So they have like these Laura adapters but I don't think they update them on device. They are just swapping out Laura adapters and I mean there are lots of models that are very small. For example um there's a Gemma 3 version that is only 270 million parameters and there's mobile LLM by Meta which are very small. They can run on device but I don't know any application that updates them on device. So sorry I uh it's so also these days you only uh really hear about the research papers which is usually not applications and the other is rest is usually proprietary information. So I don't know for sure. Yeah, good question though. Oh yeah, you were also raising your hand. >> It seems like most of the new architecture motivations like Phoenix, deep experiment, they're coming from the inference world especially reasoning and so is it like you know all the new architecture that we see right now? uh is it mainly related because we are looking at very long context. I know like the new state of like most of the architects are now up to like 1 million context but what is the context length that we are looking at and do you see like the attention especially right because will it survive or will we move to pure like SSMS or >> so >> yeah yeah so the question is um most so because you had the microphone only for the second half I'm just repeating sorry so the question was u basically why there's so much focus on or that there is so much focus on the inference part now and has it does it have anything to do with the inputs getting longer that was mainly what it was about right um so yeah I think it's because more LMS are going into let's say production from pure research um and yeah you want to scale up the customers basically uh how many people can use the model without you know just like melting your GPUs basically and then the challenge is essentially the more um tokens you have the bigger your KV cache size becomes and that's where you want these alternative um attention mechanism. So a lot of people invest into hey how can we get the same modeling performance but saving basically like the first stage is always like hey let's build the best model and now that we have a good model there are two branches one is making the model even better. So that's one line of the engineering team and the other part of the engineering team is like hey how we do we take the model and make it cheaper. Um I don't I'm not affiliated with OpenAI for example but like but I would say as an outsider like observer that the recent models in OpenAI for example um have been more focused on making things cheaper also for example I remember last year there was uh GPD 4.5 which was a bigger more expensive model but then they went back to GPD 5 which is cheaper so there's a lot of engineering focus on this and we don't know what attention mechanism they used there are lots of variants and now quen M3 next with um the G gated delta net or the sparse attention in deepseek version 3. So there is a lot of focus and the other question was or related whether um state space models will replace that. I honestly don't will replace attention mechanisms. I honestly don't think so because um they're more meeting in the middle now basically. So uh because yeah early um state space models didn't use attention and then we have on the other side attention and then they kind of converge. We have these hybrids. So I think it's more going towards this deepseek version 3.2 to sparse attention more tricks basically I would say but I I don't see full SSMs replacing attention not yet at least so but you know this is like short time scale maybe one or two years you know because the attention mechanism just works too well still you know compared to anything else y >> mine is just a request I think it's connected to what he asked >> uh can you just include uh maybe a blog post on uh having a fine-tuning done based on the MOE model for like let's say Quen 335B or something like that. >> Uh sorry did I understand correctly a blog post on the uh mixture of experts. Yes. Ah yeah this would be an interesting point because I think uh the methods I showed you like uh sliding window attention group query attention multi latent attention you don't really have to change your training pipeline but with you have another the zlos you have other loss terms so training is trickier so um it is um you have to make a >> that but uh >> the the the model doesn't render itself right so [clears throat] so like basically on the dense model it does work, the training pipeline does work, but the moment I switch that model to ae sort of a thing, then it's things start breaking. So I was just looking for some guidance there. >> Yeah. Yeah. Maybe one day I have it on my list to train. So right now I only um implemented like the quen 3 from uh scratch is from scratch implementation for inference but I don't have any blog post yet on on training. This is an interesting one. I have it somewhere on my list after the reasoning models. [laughter] It's just a request. Thank you. >> Thank you. >> Um, when you're making some of these architectural decisions, are there any special considerations over like classical approaches to hyperparameter search? Um so you mean essentially when you come up with an architectures how why you would decide to do this certain architecture and not other architectures like other flavors right >> um yeah it's interesting it's I think um I would say what's a bit different from traditional hyperparameter search in deep learning is that transformers with this large data is are more robust to variations um so I would say there's Whether you use galu or silu activations or giggloo or swigloo or whether you use one or more transformer blocks or think or whether you use rms norm or layer norm it almost doesn't matter that much. It's like tiny differences um where I think most um I would say most developers they stick with like they have like almost like a style like a certain flavor where um I think Google Gemma still uses Gekloo or Galu because it was like a paper they had so they just they stick with it. Um it's more almost like a historic artifact. For example, when I looked at the GPT OSS paper, the Open AI uh open source model, they use for example still the bias term like the um in the in the linear layer. So instead of just doing matrix multiplication, they have the weight multiplication plus the bias vector which is not I mean there were a lot of papers saying it's not required. Uh but I think they still use it because they used it back in GPD2 and I think in GPD2 they used it because it was just the default in TensorFlow. Um so it's more like an historic artifact. Um there are a few things though um that do make a difference. For example um I mean unfortunately people don't share many ablation studies anymore but the mode 2 paper is actually pretty nice. They they rearranged the position of the layer norm. So from uh post to from pre to postnorm um but a bit different from GPD from the original transformer. They put it before I in before the MLP. I think I I would have to like take a look but they arranged some things and then also they added QK norm. Um there are other models like quen 3 that also uses QK norm but they did it like they explained why because they saw spikes in the loss without it. So that is the only thing to go by. They basically look at the loss early in training and then you look whether it spikes or not and if it spikes or something you try to mitigate it. Where in [snorts] traditional deep learning you would almost finish the run right? you would finish the run, look at validation, um, test accuracy. And in LLMs, it's more like almost like early intuition. Okay, this is not worth doing because it's too expensive. Let's cut it off and try something else. I think it's more like even more gut feeling, [laughter] if that makes sense. Yeah. >> Carry over to the different attention mechanisms that you presented that the the overall model ends up being fairly robust to like reasonable inclusions. Yeah, I I think so. Everyone I would say there was a point or most almost everyone uses grouped query attention because it is basically almost the same as multihead attention. Um, and Google, I think, still uses sliding window attention in addition because it's what they've done in Gemma 2. And they don't have ane. I think that's first. I don't I'm not affiliated, but I think that's still why they have the sliding window attention instead of using ane. Everyone else uses and they, oh, let's do sliding window attention. That's my um as an outsider what I would think why they did that. And with multi head latent attention that was all there was a um a figure in the paper where they did compare and say okay if we use MLA multi had latent attention instead of um group query attention we get better modeling performance basically so there was like a reason in terms of on the data sets they do get better performance otherwise I don't think I mean um other things you could change up what's interesting is also uh there have been a lot of these linear approximations to attention for a long time since maybe 2019 or something. They get proposed in papers but they never really get used in practice. It's just this year where people like Deepseek version 3.2 with a sparse attention where it gets traction. Maybe it's because now it reached a point where it's you know actual money where these companies spend millions of dollars and then it does now make a difference. Before it was oh it looks nice on paper but we are still doing short context. So whether I spend I don't know like $50 or $60 for my training run on a small academic project I mean maybe more five or 600 it doesn't make such a big difference but if it's like $50 million versus $100 million that makes a bigger difference maybe what's motivating that basically this year I guess. Yeah. >> Uh yeah um really short question. So sorry uh you spoke about uh >> oh there's the microphone I was like >> yeah uh you spoke about uh diffusion models for text uh generation and I'm wondering how uh these approximate to the discrete space of tokens and text whereas diffusion models essentially you know through noise you're approximating uh a continuous space like I think of them as pixels is there some way of like almost snapping it to a word embedded or something like that. >> Uh when I understand correctly is um how to make it instant or like the how to get the out the text immediately like >> no well so text is tokens right and tokens is a discrete space because every token has a embedding attached to it or some sort of discrete representation whereas diffusion models typically have >> approximate yeah it operates in the continuous space. So like how does you know uh how do you reconcile with that? >> Um I would say it's yeah it's definitely a different loss in a sense but I think it's um the term text diffusion models is maybe it's suggesting it's using the same pipeline but I I would have I mean there are many many papers I will maybe go back and rewrite this up in a blog post more nicely because I've only like glanced at them. Um but I think it's quite different. It's more like how a bird model works. B R T the um back then when you masked different uh words and then you're just trying to predict the the missing token basically you know like it's more like it's more like masked language modeling than anything related to images basically and uh it's in that sense just a chain of these um unmasking steps. So you would you could technically use the same approach as in BERT basically that's my understanding but I will uh this is one thing where I'm not an expert in text diffusion models it's something I focus more on the transformers but this is something where I will sit down and go through the papers at some point and maybe write up something uh to reconcile that and compare. Yeah. Mhm. >> Uh yeah. >> Can you share your perspective on >> Yeah. Can you share your perspective on model chip code design given all these different uh model architectures in the last years? So do you think is necessary or not? Um so the question is if I could share my like uh but I how to let's say how to put them into action like how to reconcile these all these different >> do you think is it necessary to do the code design or not or >> um if it's necessary to do the coding you think or sorry >> so model chip code design. >> Mhm. and someone are doing the specialized chips and hardware for the models and but given all these different architectures and >> how do you weigh in the trade-offs? Um it's so how to like these custom chips to be honest with you I I mean there are lots of custom chips I think I mean again I'm not affiliated with any company so I don't want to say they are good or bad or anything like that but I think there are I mean there is there are different layers where um for example TPUs are really good at matrix multiplication basically what I think it's trickier to do other things beyond that I I think different chips have different strengths and I No, in in terms of I never worked with TPUs because they are proprietary to Google. I heard they are going to sell them at some point um to other cloud providers but uh in that sense um you for example have specific software that is specific to that chip and then there's the model on top of that also and I I don't know honestly how how specific these chips are for certain flavors of attention. they're mostly about matrix modification. Another in an interesting development is uh for example memory bandwidth. Um for example, I think that's I don't have the DGX spark, but that's what a lot of people talked about where it also it makes more like of a difference how big your model is. If you have a bigger model, you move less data around. There's more computation than something like that where you have more flops benefits from a graphics card that has more memory bandwidth. I think it's more about that at the moment where um for example the open weight models like deepseek the developers they're figuring out how to do things with let's say lower-end chips or new chips and how to connect the chips together basically in an efficient way and then maybe maybe this motivated the design of these uh attention mechanisms because in that setup it's even more beneficial but to be honest that is hardware is something that is a bit outside my expertise to be honest with you but good question Yeah. Mhm. [clears throat] >> Yeah. Thanks for your presentation. Uh I wanted to ask regarding explanability for LMS now because there's so many parameters. Now we might go to pentat. We are currently at trailing parameters but we might go further and they become more and more complex. Uh and in traditional blackbox model we used to have like algorithms like sharply line to explain. Uh and uh I think for some reason I think chain of thought was supposedly a good way to explain do you like can do you have any insights on like explanability and how we can like or is it even useful for LLM world? >> Yeah I it's a good question how we explain these models when they get bigger. Um yeah I think it's getting trickier also because it's more expensive. It's yeah they're getting bigger and so forth but also like um it's almost like for a normal person not even affordable to uh I mean most people can't even I mean so a lot of models are also proprietary so you can't even look into uh anything beyond input and output um and even then it's also very expensive for example there are um like costs like $1,000 $2,000 just to run it on a standard benchmark and then now imagine you had to do something with uh um gradient approximation or anything like that. It's very expensive. And um I think most I I don't I I think you're I mean maybe we'll see this more in multimodal language models, but I don't think there's much emphasis anymore on understanding things. It's more in terms of what the internal layers are doing. I think there was an interesting blog post by Claude. They looked into this u they did like a blog post looking into intermediate layers. I read this like last year I think it was but yeah there are like tips on tricks and workarounds and I don't know how much of that is really reflecting what the model is doing. It's trying to maybe find a way to explain it but I it's tricky. It's like yeah I think what makes more sense almost is to focus on custom evaluation methods like to related to a business problem how well is the model solving the business problem why it is solving the business problem well if it solves it well and it's reliable I think that's more like the focus right now and I don't see much work on understanding this unfortunately but there might there might be a lot of work I'm not aware of though good question I wish I had a better answer but I think no one has at the moment so it's a Yeah, I would say a blackbox in the sense that there are so many layers. But I think also at the same time though language models are easier even than other types of neuronet networks. I personally even find it easier than almost convolutional networks like looking at a detention mechanism and it's like the same block repeated so many times and in so many architectures. It's almost the same pattern like a cookie cutter where in that sense this part becomes easier. Yeah. But what the model does Yeah. It's a big uh model that does a lot of things internally, a lot of numbers. It's hard to uh yeah to reconcile this in a human interpretable way basically almost. Yeah. Thank you. >> Thank you. >> Yeah. Thanks again everyone. Uh it was fun. Uh I think we went way over but it was a lot of fun chatting with you all. And yeah, I will be um around again later at 3 in the expo hall, you know. So I yeah um if someone was uh planning to go, I would love to chat more and yeah uh enjoy the rest of the conference. >> Thank you.


## State of AI in 2026: LLMs, Coding, Scaling Laws, China, Agents, GPUs, AGI | Lex Fridman Podcast #490

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EV7WhVT270Q

- The following is a conversation all
about the state-of-the-art in artificial intelligence, including some of the
exciting technical breakthroughs and developments in AI that happened
over the past year, and some of the interesting things we
think might happen this upcoming year. At times, it does
get super technical, but we do try to make sure that
it remains accessible to folks outside the field without
ever dumbing it down. It is a great honor and pleasure
to be able to do this kind of episode with two of my
favorite people in the AI community, Sebastian Raschka and Nathan Lambert. They are both
widely respected machine learning researchers and engineers
who also happen to be great communicators, educators,
writers, and X posters. Sebastian is the author of two books I highly recommend for beginners
and experts alike. First is Build a Large Language Model from Scratch and Build a Reasoning
Model from Scratch. I truly believe in the
machine learning world, the best way to learn and understand
something is to build it yourself from scratch. Nathan is the post-training lead at
the Allen Institute for AI, author of the definitive book on
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback. Both of them have great X
accounts, great Substacks. Sebastian has courses on
YouTube, Nathan has a podcast. And everyone should absolutely
follow all of those. those. This is the Lex Fridman
podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the
description, where you can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, get feedback, and so on. And now, dear friends, here's
Sebastian Raschka and Nathan Lambert. So I think one useful lens to
look at all this through is the so-called DeepSeek
moment. This happened about a year ago in January 2025,
when the open-weight Chinese company DeepSeek released
DeepSeek R1, that I think it's fair to say surprised
everyone with near-state-of-the-art performance, with allegedly much less
compute for much cheaper. And from then to today, the AI competition
has gotten insane, both on the research and product
level. It's just been accelerating. discuss all of this today, and
maybe let's start with some spicy questions if we can. Who's winning at the international
level? Would you say it's the set of companies in China or the set
of companies in the United States? And Sebastian, Nathan,
it's good to see you guys. guys. So Sebastian, who
do you think is winning? - Winning is a very broad term. I would say you mentioned the DeepSeek
moment, and I think DeepSeek is winning the hearts of the people who work on
open-weight models because they share these as open models. Winning,
I think, has multiple timescales to it. We have today,
we have next year, we have in 10 years. One thing I know
for sure is that I don't think nowadays, in 2026,
that there will be any company that has access to
technology that no other company has access to. That
is mainly because researchers are frequently changing jobs and labs. They rotate. I don't think there
will be a clear winner in terms of technology access. However,
I do think there will be, The differentiating factor will be
budget and hardware constraints. I don't think the ideas
will be proprietary, but rather the resources needed
to implement them. I don't see currently a winner-take-all scenario.
I can't see that. At the moment. - Nathan, what do you think? - You see the labs put different energy
into what they're trying to do, and I think to demarcate the point in time
when we're recording this, the hype over Anthropic's Claude
Opus 4.5 model has been absolutely insane, which is just...
I mean, I've used it and built stuff in the last few weeks, and it's... it's almost
gotten to the point where it feels like a bit of a meme in terms of the hype. And it's kind of funny because this is very organic,
and then if we go back a few months ago, we can see the release date and
the notes, as Gemini 3 from Google got released, and it seemed like the marketing and just, like, wow
factor of that release was super high. But then at the end of November,
Claude Opus 4.5 was released and the hype has been growing, but Gemini 3
was before this. And it kind of feels like people don't really talk about it as much, even
though when it came out, everybody was like, this is Gemini's moment to retake Google's structural advantages in AI. And Gemini 3
is a fantastic model, and I still use it. It's just kind of
differentiation is lower. And I agree with Sebastian; what you're saying
with all these, the idea space is very fluid, but culturally
Anthropic is known for betting very hard on code, which is the Claude Code thing,
is working out for them right now. So I think that even if the ideas flow
pretty freely, so much of this is bottlenecked by human effort and the
culture of organizations, where Anthropic seems to at least be presenting
as the least chaotic. It's a bit of an advantage, if they can keep
doing that for a while. But on the other side of things, there's a lot of
ominous technology from China where there's way more labs than
DeepSeek. So DeepSeek kicked off a movement within China, I
say kind of similar to how ChatGPT kicked off a movement in the US
where everything had a chatbot. There's now tons of tech companies in China that are
releasing very strong frontier open-weight models, to the point where I would say that
DeepSeek is kind of losing its crown as the preeminent open model maker
in China, and the likes of Z.ai with their GLM
models, Minimax's models, Kimi Moonshot, especially in the
last few months, has shown more brightly. The new DeepSeek models are
still very strong, but that's kind of a... it could look back as a big
narrative point where in 2025 DeepSeek came and it provided this
platform for way more Chinese companies that are releasing these
fantastic models to kind of have this new type of operation. So these models from these
Chinese companies are open-weights, and depending on this trajectory of business
models that these American companies are doing, they could be at risk. But
currently, a lot of people are paying for AI software in the US, and
historically in China and other parts of the world, people
don't pay a lot for software. - So some of these models like DeepSeek
have the love of the people because they are open-weight. How long do
you think the Chinese companies keep releasing open-weight models? - I would say for a few years. I think
that, like in the US, there's not a clear business model for it. I have been
writing about open models for a while, and these Chinese companies have realized
it. So I get inbound from some of them. And they're smart and realize the same
constraints: a lot of top US tech companies and other IT companies
won't pay for an API subscription to Chinese companies for security
concerns. This has been a long-standing habit in tech, and the people at
these companies then see open weight models as an ability to influence
and take part of a huge growing AI expenditure market in the US. And
they're very realistic about this, and it's working for them. I think that
the government will see that that is building a lot of influence internationally
in terms of uptake of the technology, so there's going to be a lot of
incentives to keep it going. But building these models and doing the research is
very expensive, so at some point, I expect consolidation. But I don't expect that to
be a story of 2026, where there will be more open model builders throughout
2026 than there were in 2025. And a lot of the notable ones will be in China. - You were going to say something? - Yes. You mentioned DeepSeek losing its
crown. I do think to some extent, yes, but we also have to consider though, they are
still, I would say, slightly ahead. And the other ones—it's not that DeepSeek
got worse, it's just that the other ones are using the ideas from DeepSeek.
For example, you mentioned Kimi—same architecture, they're training it. And
then again, we have this leapfrogging where they might be at some point in time a
bit better because they have the more recent model. And I think this comes back
to the fact that there won't be a clear winner. It will just be
like that: one person releases something, the other one comes in, and the
most recent model is probably always the best model. - Yeah. We'll also see the Chinese companies
have different incentives. Like, DeepSeek is very secretive,
whereas some of these startups are like the MiniMaxs and Z.ais of the
world. Those two literally have filed IPO paperwork, and they're
trying to get Western mindshare and do a lot of outreach there. So I
don't know if these incentives will change the model development, because DeepSeek
famously is built by a hedge fund, Highflyer Capital, and we don't
know exactly what they use the models for or if they care about this. - They're secretive in terms of communication; they're
not secretive in terms of the technical reports that describe how their models work. They're
still open on that front. And we should also say, on the Claude Opus 4.5 hype,
there's the layer of something being the darling of the
X echo chamber, on the Twitter echo chamber, and the actual
amount of people that are using the model. I think it's probably
fair to say that ChatGPT and Gemini are focused on the
broad user base that just want to solve problems in their
daily lives, and that user base is gigantic. So the hype
about the coding may not be representative of the actual use. - I would say also a lot of
the usage patterns are, like you said, name recognition,
brand and stuff, but also muscle memory almost, where, you
know, ChatGPT has been around for a long time. People just got used to
using it, and it's almost like a flywheel: they recommend it to other users and that
stuff. One interesting point is also the customization of LLMs.
For example, ChatGPT has a memory feature, right? And so you
may have a subscription and you use it for personal stuff, but I don't know
if you want to use that same thing at work. Because it's a boundary between private and work.
If you're working at a company, they might not allow that or you may not want that. And
I think that's also an interesting point where you might have multiple
subscriptions. One is just clean code. It has nothing of your
personal images or hobby projects in there. It's just like the work thing.
And then the other one is your personal thing. So I think that's also something where there are
two different use cases, and it doesn't mean you only have to have one. I think
the future is also multiple ones. - What model do you think won 2025, and what
model do you think is going to win '26? - I think in the context of consumer chatbots,
it's a question of: are you willing to bet on Gemini over ChatGPT? Which I would say, in my gut,
feels like a bit of a risky bet because OpenAI has been the incumbent, and
there are so many benefits to that in tech. I think the momentum, if you look at 2025, was on
Gemini's side, but they were starting from such a low point. And RIP Bard and these
earlier attempts at getting started. Huge credit to them for powering through the
organizational chaos to make that happen. But also it's hard to bet against
OpenAI because they always come off as so chaotic, but they're very good
at landing things. And I think, personally, I have very mixed
reviews of GPT-5, but it must have saved them so much money with the
high-line feature being a router where most users are no longer charging
their GPU costs as much. So I think it's very hard to dissociate the things that I like out of models
versus the things that are going to actually be a general
public differentiator. - What do you think about
2026? Who's going to win? - I'll say something, even though it's risky. I think
Gemini will continue to make progress on ChatGPT. I think Google's scale,
when both of these are operating at such extreme
scales—and Google has the ability to separate research and product
a bit better, whereas you hear so much about OpenAI being chaotic operationally
and chasing the high-impact thing, which is a very startup culture. And then
on the software and enterprise side, I think Anthropic will have continued success,
as they've again and again been set up for that. And obviously Google Cloud
has a lot of offerings, but I think this kind of Gemini name
brand is important for them to build. Google Cloud will continue to do well, but that's a more complex
thing to explain in the ecosystem, because that's competing with
the likes of Azure and AWS rather than on the model provider side. - So in infrastructure, you think
TPU is giving an advantage? - Largely because the margin on
NVIDIA chips is insane, and Google can develop everything from top to
bottom to fit their stack and not have to pay this margin. And they've
had a head start in building data centers. So all of these things that have
both high lead times and very hard margins on high costs, Google has a just kind
of historical advantage there. And if there's going to be a new paradigm,
it's most likely to come from OpenAI where their research division
again and again has shown this ability to land a new research
idea or a product. Like Deep Research, Sora, o1
thinking models—all these definitional things have come from
OpenAI, and that's got to be one of their top traits as an organization. So
it's kind of hard to bet against that, but I think a lot of this
year will be about scale and optimizing what could be described
as low-hanging fruit in models. - And clearly there's a trade-off
between intelligence and speed. This is what ChatGPT-5 was trying to solve behind the scenes.
It's like, do people actually want intelligence, the broad
public, or do they want speed? - I think it's a nice variety, or
the option to have a toggle there. I mean, for my personal usage,
most of the time when I look something up, I use ChatGPT to ask a quick
question, get the information I wanted fast. For most daily
tasks, I use the quick model. Nowadays, I think the auto mode is pretty
good where you don't have to specifically say thinking or non-thinking.
Then again, I also sometimes want the pro mode. Very often
what I do is, when I have something written, I put it into
ChatGPT and say, "Hey, do a very thorough check. Are all my
references correct? Are all my thoughts correct? Did I make any formatting
mistakes and are the figure numbers wrong?" Or something like
that. And I don't need that right away. I finish my stuff, maybe
have dinner, let it run, come back and go through this. I think
this is where it's important to have this option. I would go crazy if for
each query I would have to wait 30 minutes or 10 minutes even. - That's me. I'm sitting over here losing my mind that you
use the router and the non-thinking model. I'm like, "How do you live with that?" That's like my reaction. I've been
heavily on ChatGPT for a while. I never touched ChatGPT-5
non-thinking. I find its tone and then its propensity for errors—it has a higher
likelihood of errors. Some of this is from back when OpenAI released
o3, which was the first model to do this deep search and find many
sources and integrate them for you. I became habituated with that. So
I will only use GPT-5.2 Thinking or Pro when I'm finding any sort
of information query for work, whether that's a paper or
some code reference that I found. And I will regularly
have like five Pro queries going simultaneously, each
looking for one specific paper or feedback on an equation or something. - I have a fun example where I needed
the answer as fast as possible for this podcast before
I was going on the trip. like a local GPU running at home
and I wanted to run a long RL experiment. And usually I also unplug
things because you never know if you're not at home, you don't want things
plugged in. And I accidentally unplugged the GPU. My wife was already in the
car and it's like, "Oh dang." Then basically I wanted as
fast as possible a Bash script that runs my different
experiments and the evaluation. And it's something I know, I
learned how to use the Bash interface or Bash terminal, but
in that moment I just needed like 10 seconds, give me the command. - This is a hilarious situation
but yeah, so what did you use? - So I did the non-thinking fastest
model. It gave me the Bash command to chain different
scripts to each other and then the thing is like you have the
tee thing where you want to route this to a log file. Top of my head I was just
like in a hurry, I could have thought about it myself. - By the way I don't know if there's a
representative case, wife waiting in the car- ... you have to run, you know, unplug the GPU. You
have to generate a Bash script. This sounds like a movie, like- Mission Impossible. - I use Gemini for that. So I use thinking for
all the information stuff and then Gemini for fast things or stuff that I could sometimes
Google, which is like it's good at explaining things and I trust that it has
this kind of background of knowledge and it's simple. And the Gemini app
has gotten a lot better and- It's good for those sorts of things. And
then for code and any sort of philosophical discussion, I use Claude
Opus 4.5. Also always with extended thinking. Extended thinking and
inference time scaling is just a way to make the models marginally smarter.
And I will always err on that side when the progress is very high
because you don't know when that'll unlock a new use case. And then sometimes
use Grok for real-time information or finding something on AI
Twitter that I knew I saw and I need to dig up and I just
fixated on. Although when Grok 4 came out, the Grok
4 SuperGrok Heavy, which was like their pro variant was actually very good
and I was pretty impressed with it, and then it just kind of like muscle memory lost
track of it with having the ChatGPT app open. So I use many different things. - Yeah. I actually do use Grok 4 Heavy for debugging. For like hardcore
debugging that the other ones can't solve, I find that it's the
best at. And... it's interesting 'cause you say ChatGPT is
the best interface. For me, for that same reason, but
this could be just momentum- Gemini is the better interface for me.
I think because I fell in love with their best needle in the
haystack. If I ever put something that has a lot of context but I'm
looking for very specific kinds of information to make sure it tracks all of
it, I find at least that Gemini for me has been the best. So it's funny with some of these models,
if they win your heart over- for one particular feature
on one particular day, for that particular query, that
prompt, you're like, "This model's better." And so you'll
just stick with it for a bit until it does something really dumb. There's
like a threshold effect. Some smart thing and then you fall in love with it and then it
does some dumb thing and you're like, "You know what? I'm gonna switch and try Claude or
ChatGPT." And all that kind of stuff. - This is exactly it: you use it until it
breaks, until you have a problem, and then you change the LLM. And I think it's the same as how we use anything,
like our favorite text editor, operating systems, or the browser.
I mean, there are many options: Safari, Firefox, Chrome. They're
relatively similar, but then there are edge cases, extensions
you want, and then you switch. But I don't think anyone types
the same thing into different browsers and compares them. You
only do that when something breaks. So that's a good point. You use it until
it breaks, then you explore other options. - On the long context thing, I was
also a Gemini user, but the GPT-5.2 release blog had crazy long context
scores. People were like, "Did they just figure out some algorithmic
change?" It went from 30% to 70% in this minor model
update. It's very hard to keep track of all of these
things, but now I look more favorably at GPT-5.2's long
context. So it's just like, "How do I actually get to testing
this?" It's a never-ending battle. - Well, it's interesting that none of
us talked about the Chinese models from a usage perspective. What
does that say? Does it mean the Chinese models are not as good, or are
we just very biased and US-focused? - I think currently there's a discrepancy
between the model and the platform. The open models are more known for the
open weights, not the platform yet. known for the open weights,
not their platform yet. - Many companies will sell you open-model
inference at a very low cost. With OpenRouter, it's easy to
look at multi-model things. You can run DeepSeek on Perplexity.
Sitting here, we're like, "We use OpenAI GPT-5 Pro consistently."
We're all willing to pay for the marginal intelligence gain. These
models from the US are better in terms of the outputs.
I think the question is, will they stay better for this
year and for years to come? As long as they're better,
I'm gonna pay for them. There's also analysis showing that the way the Chinese models are served—you could
argue this is due to export controls— is that they use fewer GPUs per
replica, which makes them slower and have different errors. If speed and
intelligence are in your favor as a user, in the US, a lot of users will go for
this. And I think that will spur these Chinese companies to want
to compete in other ways, whether it's free or substantially
lower costs, or it'll breed creativity in terms of offerings,
which is good for the ecosystem. But the simple thing is: the US models
are currently better, and we use them. I tried these other open models, and
I'm like, "Fun, but I don't go back." models, and I'm like, "Fun, but not
gonna... I don't go back to it." - We didn't really mention
programming. That's another use case that a lot of people deeply
care about. I use basically half-and-half Cursor and Claude
Code, because they're... I fundamentally different
experiences and both are useful. What do you guys... You
program quite a bit, so what do you use?
What's the current vibe? - So, I use the Codeium plugin for
VS Code. You know, it's very convenient. It's just like a plugin, and then
it's a chat interface that has access to your repository. I know that Claude Code
is, I think, a bit different. It is a bit more agentic. It touches more things.
It does the whole project for you. I'm not quite there yet where I'm comfortable
with that because maybe I'm a control freak, but I still would like
to see a bit what's going on. And Codeium is kind of, right now, for
me, the sweet spot where it is helping me, but it is not
taking completely over. - I should mention, one of the reasons
I do use Claude Code is to build the skill of programming with English. I
mean, the experience is fundamentally different. You're... As
opposed to micromanaging the details of the process of the
generation of the code, and looking at the diff, which you can
in Cursor if that's the IDE you use, and in changing, altering. Looking and reading the code and
understanding the code deeply as you progress, versus just thinking in
this design space and just guiding it at this macro level, which I think is another way of thinking
about the programming process. Also, we should say that
Claude Code just seems to be somehow a better utilization
of Claude Opus 4.5. - It's a good side-by-side for people to do. You
can have Claude Code open, you can have Cursor open, you can have VS Code open, and you
can select the same models on all of them— ...and ask questions, and it's very
interesting. Claude Code is way better in that domain. It's remarkable. - All right, we should say that both
of you are legit on multiple fronts: researchers, programmers,
educators, Tweeters. And on the book front,
too. So Nathan, at some point soon, hopefully has
an RLHF book coming out. - It's available for preorder, and
there's a full digital preprint. I'm just making it pretty and better organized for
the physical thing, which is a lot of why I do it, because it's fun to create things
that you think are excellent in the physical form when so much
of our life is digital. - I should say, going to Perplexity here,
Sebastian Raschka is a machine learning researcher and author known for several
influential books. A couple of them that I wanted to mention—which is a book
I highly recommend—Build a Large Language Model from Scratch,
and the new one, Build a Reasoning Model from Scratch.
So, I'm really excited about that. Building stuff from scratch is one
of the most powerful ways of learning. - Honestly, building an LLM from scratch is
a lot of fun. It's also a lot to learn. And like you said, it's probably the best
way to learn how something really works, 'cause you can look at figures, but
figures can have mistakes. You can look at concepts and explanations, but
you might misunderstand them. But if there is code, and the code works, you know it's correct. I mean,
there's no misunderstanding. It's precise. Otherwise, it wouldn't work. And I
think that's the beauty behind coding. It doesn't lie. It's math, basically. So, even though with math, I think you can have
mistakes in a book you would never notice. Because you are not running the math when you
are reading the book, you can't verify this. And with code, what's nice
is you can verify it. - Yeah, I agree with you about the Build
an LLM from Scratch book. It's nice to tune out everything else, the internet
and so on, and just focus on the book. But, you know, I read several
history books. It's just less lonely somehow. It's really more
fun. Like for example, on the programming front, I think it's genuinely
more fun to program with an LLM. And I think it's genuinely
more fun to read with an LLM. But you're right. That
distraction should be minimized. So you use the LLM to basically enrich
the experience, maybe add more context. I just find the rate of aha moments
for me is really high with LLMs. - 100%. I also want to correct myself:
I'm not suggesting not to use LLMs. I suggest doing it in
multiple passes. Like, one pass just offline, focus mode, and
then after that... I mean, I also take notes, but I, I try
to resist the urge to immediately look things up. I do
a second pass. It's just more structured this way. Sometimes
things are answered in the chapter, but sometimes also it just
helps to let it sink in and think about it. Other people have different
preferences. I highly recommend using LLMs when reading books. For me, it's not the
first thing to do; it's the second pass. - My recommendation is the opposite. I
like to use the LLM at the beginning to lay out the full context of
what is this world that I'm now stepping into? But I try
to avoid clicking out of the LLM into the world of Twitter and blogs, because then you're down
this rabbit hole. You're reading somebody's opinion. There's a flame war
about a particular topic and all of a sudden you're in the realm
of the internet and Reddit and so on. But if you're
purely letting the LLM give you the context of why this
matters, what are the big picture ideas... sometimes books are good
at doing that, but not always. - This is why I like the ChatGPT app,
because it gives the AI a home on your computer where you can focus on it,
rather than just being another tab in my mess of internet options.
And I think Claude Code does a good job of making
that a joy, where it seems very engaging as a product
design to be an interface that your AI will then go out into
the world. It's something that is intangible between it and
Codex; it just feels warm and engaging, where Codex can often
be as good from OpenAI, but it just, feel a little bit rough around
the edges. Whereas Claude Code makes it fun to build things
from scratch, where you just trust that it'll make something.
Obviously this is good for websites and kind of refreshing
tooling and stuff like this, which I use it for,
or data analysis. For my On my blog, we scrape Hugging Face so we keep
download numbers for every dataset and model. over time, so we have them. And Claude was
just like, "Yeah, I've made use of that data, no problem." And I was like,
"That would've taken me days." And then I have enough situational awareness to be
like, "Okay, these trends obviously make sense." You can check things. But that's just a
wonderful interface where you can have an intermediary and not have to do
the kind of awful low-level work that you would have to do to
maintain different web projects. - All right. So we just
talked about a bunch of the closed-weight models. Let's talk about the open ones. Tell me about
the landscape of open LLM models. Which are interesting?
Which stand out to you and why? We already mentioned DeepSeek R1. - Do you wanna see how many we can
name off the top of our head? - Yeah, without looking at notes. - DeepSeek, Kimi, MiniMax, Z.ai,
Moonshot. We're just going Chinese. - Let's throw in Mistral AI, Gemma... ...gpt-oss, the open weight
model by OpenAI. Actually, NVIDIA had a really cool
one, Nemotron 3. There, there's a lot of stuff especially at the
end of the year. Qwen might be the one— - Oh, yeah. Qwen was the
obvious name I was gonna say. You can get at least 10 Chinese
and at least 10 Western. I think that OpenAI released
their first open model— ...since GPT-2. When I was writing about OpenAI's open model release, they were like,
"Don't forget about GPT-2," which I thought was really funny 'cause it's just such a
different time. But gpt-oss-120b is actually a very strong model and
does some things that other models don't do very well. Selfishly, I'll promote
a bunch of Western companies in the US and Europe that have these fully open models.
I work at the Allen Institute for AI, where we've been building OLMo, which
releases data and code. And now we have actual competition for people
that are trying to release everything so that others can train these models.
There's the Institute for Foundation Models/LM360, which has had their K2 models of various types.
Apertus is a Swiss research consortium. Hugging Face has SmolLM, which is very popular. And NVIDIA's Nemotron
3 has started releasing data as well. And then Stanford's Martini
Community Project, which is kind of making it so there's a pipeline for people
to open a GitHub issue and implement a new idea and then have it run in a
stable language modeling stack. This space, that list
was way smaller in 2024— ...so I think it was just AI2. So it's
a great thing for more people to get involved and to understand language
models, which doesn't really have a Chinese analog. While I'm talking, I'll say that the Chinese open
language models tend to be much bigger, and that gives them higher
peak performance as MoEs, where a lot of these things that we like a
lot, whether it was Gemma and Nemotron, have tended to be smaller
models from the US, which is starting to change from the US and Europe.
Mistral Large 3 came out, which was a giant MoE model, very similar
to DeepSeek architecture in December. And then a startup, RCAI, and
both Nemotron and NVIDIA have teased MoE models way bigger than
100 billion parameters- like this 400 billion parameter
range coming in this Q1 2026 timeline. So I think this
kind of balance is set to change this year in terms of what people are
using the Chinese versus US open models for, which I'm personally going
to be very excited to watch. - First of all, huge props for
being able to name so many of these. Did you actually name LLaMA? - No. - I feel like ... - RIP. - This was not on purpose. - RIP LLaMA. All right. Can you mention some interesting
models that stand out? You mentioned Qwen 3 is obviously a standout. - So I would say the year's almost
bookended by both DeepSeek V3 and R1. And then on the other
hand, in December, DeepSeek-V3.2. Because what I like about those is
they always have an interesting architecture tweak that others don't have. But
otherwise, if you want to go with the familiar but really good
performance, Qwen 3 and, like Nathan said, also gpt-oss-120b.
And I think what's interesting about it is it's kind
of like the first public or open weight model that was really trained
with tool use in mind, which I do think is kind of a paradigm shift
where the ecosystem was not quite ready for it. By tool use, I mean
that the LLM is able to do a web search or to call a Python interpreter. And I do think it's a
standout because it's a huge unlock. Because one of the
most common complaints about LLMs are, for example,
hallucinations, right? And so, in my opinion, one of the best
ways to solve hallucinations is to not try to always remember
information or make things up. For math, why not use a
calculator app or Python? If I ask the LLM, "Who won
the soccer World Cup in 1998?" instead of just trying
to memorize, it could go do a search. I think mostly
it's still a Google search. So ChatGPT and gpt-oss-120b,
they would do a tool call to Google, maybe find the FIFA
website. Find, okay, it was France. It would get you that information
reliably instead of just trying to memorize it. So I think it's
a huge unlock which right now is not fully utilized yet by
the open-source, open-weight ecosystem. A lot of people
don't use tool call modes because I think, first, it's a trust thing.
You don't want to run this on your computer where it has access to tools, could wipe your
hard drive or whatever. So you want to maybe containerize that. But
I do think that is like a really important step for the
upcoming years to have this ability. - So a few quick things.
First of all, thank you for defining what you mean by tool use. I
think that's a great thing to do in general for the concepts we're talking
about. Even things as sort of well-established as MoEs. You have to say that means mixture
of experts, and you kind of have to build up an intuition for people what
that means, how it's actually utilized, what are the different flavors. So what
does it mean that there's just such an explosion of open models?
What's your intuition? - If you're releasing an open model, you want people
to use it, is the first and foremost thing. And then after that comes things like
transparency and trust. I think when you look at China, the biggest reason
is that they want people around the world to use these models, and I think a
lot of people will not. If you look outside of the US, a lot of people will not pay for software, but they
might have computing resources where you can put a model on it and run it. I think there can also be
data that you don't want to send to the cloud. So the number one thing is
getting people to use models, use AI, or use your AI that might not be
able to do it without having access to the model. - I guess we should state explicitly, so we've
been talking about these Chinese models and open weight models.
Oftentimes, the way they're run is locally. So it's not like you're sending
your data to China or to whoever developed Silicon Valley, or whoever
developed the model. - A lot of American startups
make money by hosting- ...these models from China and
selling them. It's called selling tokens, which means somebody will call
the model to do some piece of work. I think the other reason is for US
companies like OpenAI. They are so GPU deprived. They're at the limits of the
GPUs. Whenever they make a release, they're always talking about
like, "Our GPUs are hurting." And I think during one of these
gpt-oss-120b release sessions, Sam Altman said, "Oh, we're releasing this because
we can use your GPUs. We don't have to use our GPUs, and OpenAI can
still get distribution out of this," which is another very real thing,
because it doesn't cost them anything. - And for the user, I think also,
there are users who just use the model locally how they would use ChatGPT.
But also for companies I think it's a huge unlock to have these models because you can
customize them, you can train them, you can add post-training,
add more data. Like, specialize them into, let's say,
law, medical models, whatever you have. And the appeal, you mentioned
Llama, the appeal of the open-weight models from China is that the
open-weight models' licenses are even friendlier. I think they are
just unrestricted open source licenses where if we use something like Llama
or Gemma, there are some strings attached. I think it's like an upper limit in
terms of how many users you have. And then if you exceed, I don't know, so and so many
million users, you have to report your financial situation to, let's
say, Meta or something like that. And I think while it is a
free model, there are strings attached, and people do like things
where strings are not attached. So I think that's also one of the
reasons, besides performance, why the open-weight models from China are so
popular, because you can just use them. There's no catch in that sense. - The ecosystem has gotten better on that
front, but mostly downstream of these new providers providing such open licenses. That was
funny when you pulled up Perplexity and said, "Kimi K2 Thinking hosted in the US." Which is
just like an exact... I've never seen this, but it's an exact example of what we're talking
about where people are sensitive to this. But Kimi K2 Thinking and Kimi K2 is
a model that is very popular. People say that has very good creative writing
and also in doing some software things. So it's just these little quirks that
people pick up on with different models that they like. - What are some interesting ideas
that some of these models have explored that you can speak to, that
are particularly interesting to you? - Maybe we can go chronologically. I mean,
there was, of course, DeepSeek. DeepSeek R1 that came out in January of 2025,
if we just focus on 2025. However, this was based on DeepSeek-V3,
which came out the year before in December 2024. There are
multiple things on the architecture side. What is fascinating is...
I mean, that's what I do with my from-scratch coding projects. You can
still start with GPT-2, and you can add things to that model to make it
into this other model. So it's all still kind of like the same
lineage. It is a very close relationship between those. But
top of my head, DeepSeek—what was unique there is the Mixture of Experts.
Not that they were inventing Mixture of Experts—we can maybe talk a bit
more about what Mixture of Experts means—but just to list these
things first before we dive into detail. Mixture of Experts,
but then they also had Multi-head Latent Attention, which is a tweak
to the attention mechanism, where this was, I would say,
the main distinguishing factor between these
open-weight models. Different tweaks to make inference or KV
cache size... We can also define KV cache in a few moments,
but to kind of make it more economical to have long context, to
shrink the KV cache size. So what are tweaks that we can do? And most of them
focused on the attention mechanism. There is Multi-head Latent Attention
in DeepSeek. There is Group Query Attention, which is still very popular.
It's not invented by any of those models. It goes back a few years. But
that would be the other option. Sliding window attention—I think
OLMo 3 uses it, if I remember correctly. So there are these
different tweaks that make the models different. Otherwise, I put
them all together in an article once where I just
compared them. They are very, surprisingly similar. It's just different
numbers in terms of how many repetitions of the transformer block you
have in the center. And, like, just little knobs that people tune.
But what's so nice about it is it works no matter what. You can
tweak things. You can move the normalization layers around to get some
performance gains. And OLMo is always very good in ablation studies,
showing what it actually does to the model if you move something around.
Ablation studies: does it make it better or worse? But there are so many, let's say, ways you
can implement a transformer and make it still work. The big ideas that are
still prevalent is Mixture of Experts, multi-head latent attention,
sliding window attention, group query attention. And then at the
end of the year, we saw a focus on making the attention mechanism
scale linearly with inference token prediction. So there was
Qwen2-VL, for example, which added a gated delta
net. It's kind of inspired by State space models, where you have a fixed
state that you keep updating. But it makes essentially this attention cheaper, or it replaces attention
with a cheaper operation. - And it may be useful to step
back and talk about transformer architecture in general. - Yeah, so maybe we should start
with the GPT-2 architecture. The transformer that was derived from the
"Attention Is All You Need" paper. The "Attention Is All You Need" paper had
a transformer architecture that had two parts, an encoder and a
decoder. And GPT went just focusing in on the decoder
part. It is essentially still a neural network and it has
this attention mechanism inside. And you predict
one token at a time. You pass it through an embedding layer. There's
the transformer block. The transformer block has attention modules and a fully
connected layer. And there are some normalization layers in between. But it's essentially
neural network layers with this attention mechanism. So coming from
GPT-2 when we move on to gpt-oss-120b, there is, for
example, the Mixture of Experts layer. It's not invented by
gpt-oss-120b. It's a few years old. But it is essentially a tweak to make
the model larger without consuming more compute in each forward pass. So
there is this fully connected layer, and if listeners are
familiar with multi-layer perceptrons, you can think of a
mini multi-layer perceptron, a fully connected neural network layer
inside the transformer. And it's very expensive, because it's fully connected. If you
have a thousand inputs and a thousand outputs, that's like one million connections.
And it's a very expensive part in this transformer. And the idea
is to kind of expand that into multiple feedforward
networks. So instead of having one, let's say you have 256, but it
would make it way more expensive, because now you have 256, but you don't
use all of them at the same time. So you now have a router that says, "Okay,
based on this input token, it would be useful to use this fully
connected network." And in that context, it's called an expert. So a
Mixture of Experts means you have multiple experts. And depending on what
your input is, let's say it's more math-heavy, it would use different
experts, compared to, let's say, translating input text from English to
Spanish. It would maybe consult different experts. It's not quite clear, I mean,
not as clear-cut to say, "Okay, this is only an expert for math and
for Spanish." It's a bit more fuzzy. But the idea is
essentially that you pack more knowledge into the network, but not all
the knowledge is used all the time. That would be very wasteful.
So, during the token generation, you are more selective.
There's a router that selects which tokens should go to which expert.
It adds more complexity. It's harder to train. There's a lot that
can go wrong, like collapse and everything. So I think that's why OLMo
3 still uses dense... I mean, you have OLMo models with Mixture of
Experts, but dense models, where dense means... So also, it's
jargon. There's a distinction between dense and sparse. So Mixture
of Experts is considered sparse, because we have a lot of experts, but only
a few of them are active. So that's called sparse. And then dense would be the
opposite, where you only have one fully connected module, and
it's always utilized. - So maybe this is a good place
to also talk about KV cache. But actually, before that,
even zooming out, like fundamentally, how many new ideas have
been implemented from GPT-2 to today? Like, how different really
are these architectures? - Take the Mixture of Experts.
The attention mechanism in gpt-oss-120b, that would be the Group
Query Attention mechanism. So it's a slight tweak from Multi-Head Attention to
Group Query Attention. So that we have too... I think they replaced LayerNorm by RMSNorm, but it's just like a different
normalization there and not a big change. It's just like a tweak. The
nonlinear activation function— people familiar with deep neural
networks, I mean, it's the same as changing sigmoid with ReLU. It's not
changing the network fundamentally. It's just a little tweak.
And that's about it, I would say. It's not really fundamentally
that different. It's still the same architecture. So you can go from one into the other by just
adding these changes basically. - It fundamentally is still
the same architecture. - Yep. For example, you mentioned my book
earlier. That's a GPT-2 model in the book because it's simple
and it's very small, so 124 million parameters approximately. But
in the bonus materials, I do have OLMo from scratch, Gemini 3 from
scratch, and other types of from-scratch models. And I always start it with my
GPT-2 model and just tweak the—well, add different components and you get
from one to the other. It's kind of like a lineage in a sense. - Can you build up an intuition for
people? Because when you zoom out, you look at it, there's so much
rapid advancement in the AI world. And at the same time, fundamentally
the architectures have not changed. So where is all the turbulence, the
turmoil of the advancement happening? Where are the gains to be had? - So there are different stages where
you develop the network or train the network. You have the pre-training.
Now back in the day, it was just pre-training with GPT-2. Now you
have pre-training, mid-training, and post-training. So I think
right now we are in the post-training focus stage.
Pre-training still gives you advantages if you scale it up with
better, higher quality data. But then we have capability unlocks that
were not there with GPT-2, for For example, ChatGPT is basically a GPT-3 model. And GPT-3 is the same as
GPT-2 in terms of architecture. What was new was adding
supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning with human feedback.
So it's more on the algorithmic side than the architecture. - I would say that the systems also change a
lot. If you listen to NVIDIA's announcements, they talk about things like, "You
now do FP8, you can now do FP4." What's happening is these labs are figuring
out how to utilize more compute to put it into one model, which lets
them train faster and put more data in. And then you can find better
configurations faster by doing this. So you can look at, essentially,
tokens per second per GPU as a metric that you look at when
you're doing large-scale training. You can go from 10k to 13k
by turning on FP8 training, which means you're using less
memory per parameter in the model. By saving less information,
you do less communication and train faster. So all of these
system things underpin way faster experimentation
on data and algorithms. It's a loop that keeps going where it's hard to
describe when you look at architectures and they're exactly the same, but the code base used
to train these models is vastly different- -and you could probably... the GPUs
are different but you probably train gpt-oss-20b way faster in wall-clock
time than GPT-2 was trained at the time. - Yeah. Like you said, they had, for
example, in Mixture of Experts this FP4 optimization where you
get more throughput. But I do think, for speed this is true, but it doesn't give the model new capabilities.
It's just: how much can we make the computation coarser
without suffering in terms of model performance degradation?
But I do think- I mean, there are alternatives popping up to
the transformer. Text diffusion models, a completely different paradigm. And
there is also... I mean, although text diffusion models might use
transformer architectures, it's not an autoregressive transformer.
And also Mamba models. It's a state space model. But
they do have trade-offs, and nothing has yet replaced
the autoregressive transformer as the state-of-the-art model.
For state-of-the-art, you would still go with that, but there are now
alternatives for the cheaper end—alternatives that are kind of making compromises. It's not just one
architecture anymore. There are little ones coming up. But if we talk about
the state-of-the-art, it's pretty much still the transformer architecture, autoregressive,
derived from GPT-2 essentially. - I guess the big question here is, we talked
quite a bit about the architecture behind the pre-training. Are the scaling laws
holding strong across pre-training, post-training, inference, context
size, data, and synthetic data? - I'd like to start with the technical
definition of a scaling law- -which informs all of this. The scaling
law is the power law relationship between... You can think of the x-axis,
so kind of what you are scaling as a combination of compute and data,
which are kind of similar, and then the y-axis is like the held-out
prediction accuracy over next tokens. We talked about models being autoregressive.
It's like if you keep a set of text that the model has not seen, how
accurate will it get when you train? And the idea of scaling laws came
when people figured out that that was a very predictable
relationship. And I think that that technical term is continuing,
and then the question is, what do users get out of it? Then there
are more types of scaling where, OpenAI's o1 was famous for introducing
inference time scaling. And I think less famously for also showing that you
can scale reinforcement learning training and get kind of this log x-axis and then a linear increase in performance on y-axis.
So there's kind of these three axes now where the traditional scaling laws are talked
about for pre-training, which is how big your model is and how big your dataset is,
and then scaling reinforcement learning, which is like how long can you do this trial
and error learning that we'll talk about. We'll define more of this, and then this
inference time compute, which is just letting the model generate more tokens on a specific
problem. So I'm kind of bullish, but they're all really still working, but
the low-hanging fruit has mostly been taken, especially in the last year on reinforcement
learning with verifiable rewards, which is this RLVR, and then
inference time scaling, which is just why these models feel
so different to use, where previously you would get that first token immediately.
And now they'll go off for seconds, minutes, or even hours,
generating these hidden thoughts before giving you the first word of
your answer. And that's all about this inference time scaling, which is such a wonderful kind of step function in
terms of how the models change abilities. They kind of enabled this tool use
stuff and enabled this much better software engineering that we
were talking about. And this, when we say enabled, is almost entirely
downstream of the fact that this reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards training just kind of let the models pick up these skills very
easily. So let the models learn, so if you look at the reasoning
process when the models are generating a lot of tokens, what it'll often be doing is:
it tries a tool, it looks at what it gets back. It tries another API, it sees what it
gets back and if it solves the problem. So the models, when you're training
them, very quickly learn to do this. And then at the end of the day, that
gives this kind of general foundation where the model can use CLI
commands very nicely in your repo and handle Git for you and move
things around and organize things or search to find more information, which if
we were sitting in these chairs a year ago is something that we didn't really think
of the models doing. So this is just kind of something that has happened this
year and has totally transformed how has totally transformed how
we think of using AI which evolution and just unlocks so
much value. But it's like, just so- pr- unlocks so much
value. But it's- it's like, it's not clear what the next avenue will
be in terms of unlocking stuff like this. I think there's... we'll get to continual
learning later, but there's a lot of buzz around certain areas of AI, but no
one knows when the next step function will really come. - So you've actually said
quite a lot of things there, and said profound things
quickly. It would be nice to unpack them a little bit. You say you're
bullish basically on every version of scaling. So can we just even start
at the beginning? Pre-training, are we kind of implying that the
low- hanging fruit on pre-training scaling has been picked? Has pre-training hit a plateau, or is even pre-training
still something you're bullish on? - Pre-training has gotten extremely
expensive. I think to scale up pre-training, it's also implying
that you're gonna serve a very large model to the users.
So I think that it's been loosely established the likes of GPT-4
and similar models were around one trillion parameters at the biggest size.
There's a lot of rumors that they've actually gotten smaller as training has
gotten more efficient. You want to make the model smaller because then your costs
of serving go down proportionately. These models, the cost of training
them is really low relative to the cost of serving them to hundreds of millions of
users. I think DeepSeek had this famous number of about five million dollars for
pre-training at cloud market rates. In OLMo 3, section 2.4
in the paper, we just detailed how long we had the GPU clusters
sitting around for training which includes engineering
issues, multiple seeds, and it was like about two million dollars to rent
the cluster to deal with all the headaches of training a model. So
these models are pretty— like, a lot of people could get one to
10 million dollars to train a model, but the recurring costs of
serving millions of users is really billions of dollars of compute.
I think that you can look at a thousand GPU rental you can pay
100 grand a day for. And these companies could have millions of GPUs.
Like you can look at how much these things cost to sit around. So
that's kind of a big thing, and then it's like, if scaling
is actually giving you a better model, is it gonna be financially worth it?
And I think we'll slowly push it out as AI solves more compelling tasks,
so like the likes of Claude Opus 4.5, making Claude Code just
work for things. I— I launched this project called the
ATOM project, which is American Truly Open Models in July, and
that was like a true vibe coded website, and like,
I have a job to make plots and stuff. And then I came back to
refresh it in the last few weeks and it's like Claude Opus 4.5 versus whatever model at
the time was like, just crushed all the issues that it had from building in
June and July and like, it might be a bigger model. There's a lot of things that go
into this, but there's still progress coming. - So what you're speaking to is the
nuance of the y-axis of the scaling laws—the way it's experienced
versus on a benchmark, the actual intelligence might be
different. But still, your intuition about pre-training, if you
scale the size of compute, will the models get better? Not
whether it's financially viable but just from the law aspect of it, do you
think the models will get smarter? - Yeah. And I think that there's...
And this sometimes comes off as almost like disillusionment
from people, leadership at AI companies saying this, but they're like,
"It's held for 13 orders of magnitude of compute, why would it ever
end?" So I think fundamentally it is pretty unlikely to stop, it's just
eventually we're not even gonna be able to test the bigger scales because of all the
problems that come with more compute. I think that there's a
lot of talk on how 2026 is a year when very large
Blackwell compute clusters, like gigawatt-scale facilities at
hyperscalers, are coming online. These were all contracts for
power and data centers that were signed and sought
out in 2022 and 2023. So before or right after ChatGPT.
It took this two-to-three-year lead time to build these bigger clusters to
train the models. While there's obviously immense interest in building even more data
centers than that. So that is the crux that people are saying: these new clusters
are coming. The labs are gonna have more compute for training.
They're going to utilize this, but it's not a given. I've seen so
much progress that I expect it, and I expect a little bit
bigger models, and I expect... I would say it's more like we'll see a
$2,000 subscription this year. We've seen $200 subscriptions. That could 10X again,
and these are the kind of things that could come, and they're all
downstream of this bigger model that offers just a little
bit more cutting edge. - So, you know, it's reported that xAI
is gonna hit that one-gigawatt scale early '26, and a full two gigawatts by year end. How
do you think they'll utilize that in the context of scaling laws? Is a lot of that inference?
Is a lot of that training? - It ends up being all of
the above. So I think that all of your decisions when
you're training a model come back to pre-training. So if you're going to
scale RL on a model, you still need to decide on your architecture that enables
this. We were talking about other architectures and using different types of
attention, or a mixture of experts models. The sparse nature of MoE models makes it much more efficient to do
generation, which becomes a big part of post-training, and you need to
have your architecture ready so that you can actually scale up this
compute. I still think most of the compute is going in at pre-training.
Because you can still make a model better, you still want to go and revisit
this. You still want the best base model you can. And in a few years that'll
saturate and the RL compute will just go longer. - Are there people who disagree with
you and say pre-training is dead? It's all about scaling inference,
scaling post-training, scaling context, continual learning,
scaling data, synthetic data? - People vibe that way and describe it in
that way, but I think it's not the practice that is happening. - It's just the general vibe of
people saying this thing is dead- - The excitement is elsewhere.
So the low-hanging fruit- ...in RL is elsewhere. For example,
we released our model in November... Every company has deadlines. Our
deadline was November 20th, and for that, our run was five
days, which compared to 2024 is a very long time to just be doing
post- training at a model of 30 billion parameters. It's not a big model. And
then in December, we had another release, where we let the RL run for
another three and a half weeks, and the model got notably better,
so we released it. And that's a to just allocate to something
that is going to be your peak- ...for the year. So it's like- - The reasoning is- - There's these types of decisions when
training a model where they just... They can't leave it forever.
You have to keep pulling in the improvements from
researchers. So you redo pre-training, you'll do this
post-training for a month, but then you need to give it to your users. You
need to do safety testing. So it's just... I think there's a lot in
place that reinforces this cycle of updating the models. Things improve.
You get a new compute cluster that lets you do something more
stably or faster. It's like you hear a lot about Blackwell
having rollout issues, where at AI2, most of the models we're
pre-training are on 1,000 to 2,000 GPUs. But when pre-training on
10,000 or 100,000 GPUs, you hit very different failures. GPUs break
in weird ways, and on a 100,000 GPU run, you're pretty much
guaranteed to have one GPU that is down. Your training code must
handle that redundancy, which is a very different problem. Whereas what we're doing, like playing
with post-training on a cluster, or for people learning ML,
what they're battling to train these biggest models is just- ...mass distributed scale,
and it's very different. But that's somewhat different
than- That's a systems problem- ...in order to enable scaling
laws, especially at pre-training. You need all these GPUs at once.
When we shift to RL, it actually lends itself to heterogeneous compute
because you have many copies of the model. To do a primer for language model reinforcement learning,
what you're doing is having two sets of GPUs. One you can call the actor,
and one you call the learner. The learner is where your actual
reinforcement learning updates happen. These are traditionally
policy gradient algorithms. Proximal Policy Optimization,
PPO, and Group Relative Policy Optimization, GRPO, are
the two popular classes. And on the other side you have
actors which are generating completions, and these completions
are what you're going to grade. Reinforcement learning is all about
optimizing reward. In practice, you can have a lot of different actors
in different parts of the world doing different types of problems,
and then you send it back to this highly networked compute
cluster to do this actual learning where you take the gradients.
You need to have a tightly meshed network to do
different types of parallelism and spread out your model for efficient
training. Every different type of training and serving has these
considerations to scale. We talked about pre-training and RL,
and then inference time scaling- how do you serve a model that's thinking
for an hour to 100 million users? I don't know about that, but I know
that's a hard problem. In order to give people this intelligence, there's
all these systems problems, and we need more compute and you need more
stable compute to do it." - But you're bullish on all of these kinds
of scaling is what I'm hearing. On the inference, on the reasoning,
even on the pre-training? - Yeah, so that's a big can of worms
here, but there are basically two... The knobs are the training and the
inference scaling where you can get gains. In a world where
we had, let's say, infinite compute resources, you want to do all of them.
So you have training, you have inference scaling, and training is like a hierarchy:
it's pre-training, mid-training, post-training. Changing the model size,
more training data, training a bigger model gives you more knowledge in the
model. Then the model, let's say, has a better base model. Back in the day,
or still, we call it a foundation model, and it unlocks... But
you don't, let's say, have the model be able to solve
your most complex tasks during pre-training or after pre-training.
You still have these other unlock phases where you have mid-training
or, for example, post-training with RL that unlocks capabilities that the model
has in terms of knowledge in the pre-training. And I think, sure, if you do more pre-training, you get a
better base model that you can unlock later. But like Nathan said, it just becomes
too expensive. We don't have infinite compute, so you have to decide, do I want to spend
that compute more on making the model larger? It's like a trade-off. In
an ideal world, you want to do all of them. And I think in that sense,
scaling is still pretty much alive. You would still get a better model, but like we saw
with Claude Opus 4.5, it's just not worth it. Because you can unlock more performance with other techniques at
that current moment, especially if you look at inference scaling. That's one
of the biggest gains this year with o1, where it took a smaller model further than pre-training a larger model like
Claude Opus 4.5. So I wouldn't say pre-training scaling is dead, it's just that
there are other more attractive ways to scale right now. But at some point,
you will still want to make some progress on the pre-training.
The thing also to consider is where you want to spend your
money. If you spend it more on the pre-training, it's like a fixed cost.
You train the model, and then it has this capability forever. You can always use it. With inference scaling, you don't spend
money during training, you spend money later per query, and then it's also like
math. How long is my model gonna be on the market if I replace it in
half a year? Maybe it's not worth spending $5 million, $10 million,
$100 million on training it longer. Maybe I will just do more inference scaling and get performance there.
It maybe costs me $2 million in terms of user queries. It becomes a question
of how many users you have and doing the math, and I think that's also where
it's interesting where ChatGPT is in a position. I think they have a lot of users where
they need to go a bit cheaper, where they have that GPT-5 model that is a bit
smaller. Other companies that have... Let's say, if
your customers have other trade-offs. For example, there was
also the Math Olympiad or some of these math problems where ChatGPT or they had a proprietary
model, and I'm pretty sure it's just like a model that has been fine-tuned
a little bit more, but most of it was during inference scaling to achieve
peak performance in certain tasks. need that all the time. But
yeah, long story short, I do think all of these pre-training,
mid-training, post-training, inference scaling, they are all still
things you want to do. It's just finding—at the moment, in this year, it's
finding the right ratio that gives you the best bang for the buck, basically. - I think this might be a good place to
define pre-training, mid-training, and post-training. - So, pre-training is the classic training
one next token prediction at a time. You have a big corpus of data. And Nathan
probably also has very interesting insights there because of OLMo 3. A big
portion of the paper focuses on the right data mix. So, pre-training is
essentially just, you know, training cross entropy loss, training
on next token prediction on a vast corpus of internet data,
books, papers and so forth. It has changed a little bit over the years
in the sense people used to throw in everything they can. Now,
it's not just raw data. It's also synthetic data
where people, let's say, rephrase certain things. So synthetic
data doesn't necessarily mean purely AI-made data. It's also taking something from an article, a Wikipedia
article, and then rephrasing it as a Q&A question or summarizing it, rewording
it, and making better data that way. Because I think of it also
like with humans. If someone, let's say, reads a book compared to a
messy—no offense, but like—Reddit post or something like that,
I do think you learn— - There's going to be a post
about this, Sebastian. - Some Reddit data is very coveted
and excellent for training. You just have to filter it. - And I think that's the idea.
I think it's like if someone took that and rephrased it in a, let's
say, more concise and structured way, I think it's higher quality data
that gets the LLM there faster. You get the same LLM out of it at the
end, but it trains faster because if the grammar and the punctuation are correct, it already learns the
correct way, versus getting information from a messy source and then
learning later how to correct that. So, I think that is how pre-training
evolved and why scaling still works. It's not just about the
amount of data, it's also the tricks to make that data
better for you, in a sense. And then mid-training is... I mean, it
used to be called pre-training. I think it's called mid-training because it was awkward
to have pre-training and post-training but nothing in the middle, right? It sounds a bit weird. You have pre-training
and post-training, but what's the actual training? So, the mid-training is usually
similar to pre-training, but it's a bit more
specialized. It's the same algorithm, but what you do is
you focus, for example, on long-context documents. The reason you don't do that during pre-training is
because you don't have that many long context documents. We have a specific
phase. And one problem of LLMs is still that it's a neural network.
It has the problem of catastrophic forgetting. So, you teach it something,
it forgets other things. And you wanna... I mean, it's not 100% forgetting,
but it's like "no free lunch." It's the same with humans. If you
ask me some math I learned 10 years ago, I would have to look at it again. - Nathan was actually saying that he's consuming
so much content that there's a catastrophic forgetting issue. - Yeah, I'm trying to learn so much about
AI, and it's like I was learning about pre-training parallelism. I'm like, "I lost
something and I don't know what it was." - I don't want to anthropomorphize
LLMs, but it's the same kind of thing in how humans learn. I mean,
quantity is not always better because you have to be selective.
And mid-training is being selective in terms of quality content
at the end. So the last thing the LLM has seen is the quality stuff.
And then post-training is all the fine-tuning, supervised fine-tuning, DPO, Reinforcement Learning
with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), with human feedback, and so forth. So
the refinement stages. And it's also interesting, it's a cost thing. You spend
a lot of money on pre-training right now. RL a bit less. With RL, you don't really teach it knowledge. It's more like unlocking
the knowledge; it's more like a skill learning, like how to solve problems with
the knowledge that it has from pre-training. There are actually three papers
this year, or last year, 2025, on RL for pre-training. But I don't
think anyone does that in production. - Toy examples for now. - Toy examples, right? But to generalize,
RL post-training is more like the skill unlock, where pre-training
is like soaking up the knowledge. - A few things that could be
helpful. A lot of people think of synthetic data as being bad
for training the models. You mentioned how DeepSeek got almost... OCR, which is Optical Character
Recognition. A lot of labs did it. Ai2 had one, Meta had multiple. And the reason each of these labs
has these is because there are vast amounts of PDFs and other digital documents
on the web that aren't in formats that are encoded with text easily.
So you use these Almost-OCR, DeepSeek OCR, or what we called our
Almost-OCR, to extract trillions of tokens of candidate data for pre-training. Pre-training dataset size is
measured in trillions of tokens. Smaller models from researchers can be
something like five to 10 trillion. researchers can be something
like five to 10 trillion. Um, Qwen is documented going up to 50 trillion,
and there are rumors that these closed labs can go to 100 trillion tokens.
Getting this potential data to put in—they have a very big funnel, and
the data you actually train on is a small percentage of this.
This character recognition data would be described as synthetic data for
pre-training in a lab. And then there's also the fact that ChatGPT now
gives wonderful answers, and you can train on those best answers, and that's
synthetic data. It's very different than early ChatGPT with lots
of hallucination data. when people became grounded
in synthetic data. - One interesting question is, if I recall
correctly, OLMo 3 was trained with less data than specifically some other
open-weight models, maybe even OLMo 2. But you still got better performance,
and that might be one example of how the data helped. - It's mostly down to data quality. I think if we had more compute, we would
train for longer. I think we'd ultimately see that as something we would want
to do. And especially with big models, you need more compute, because we
talked about having more parameters and we talked about knowledge. Essentially,
there's a ratio where big models can absorb more from data, and then you
get more benefit out of this. Any logarithmic graph in your mind
is like a small model will level off sooner if you're measuring tons
of tokens, and bigger models need more. But mostly, we aren't training
that big of models right now at AI2, and getting the highest quality data
we can is the natural starting point. - Is there something to be said about the
topic of data quality? Is there some low-hanging fruit there still where
the quality could be improved? - It's like turning the crank.
Historically, in the open, there's been a canonical best pre-training
dataset that has moved around between who has the most
recent one or the best recent effort. Like AI2's Dolma was very early with the
first OLMo, and Hugging Face had FineWeb. And there's a DCLM project,
which has been kind of like a, which stands for Data Comp Language
Model. There's been Data Comp for other machine learning projects,
and they had a very strong dataset. And a lot of it is
the internet is becoming fairly closed off, so we have Common Crawl,
which is hundreds of trillions of tokens, and you filter it. It looks
like scientific work where you're training classifiers and
making decisions based on how you prune down this dataset into the
highest quality stuff and the stuff that suits your tasks. Previously,
language models were tested a lot more on knowledge and conversational
things, but now they're expected to do math and code. To train a reasoning
model, you need to remix your whole dataset. And there's a lot of wonderful
scientific methods here where you can, you can take your gigantic dataset,
sample really tiny things from different sources, such as
GitHub, Stack Exchange, Reddit, Wikipedia. You can sample small things from
them, and train small models on each of these mixes and measure their performance on your
evaluations. You can just do basic linear regression, and it's like, "Here's your optimal
dataset." But if your evaluations change, your dataset changes a lot. So a lot
of OLMo 3 was new sources for reasoning to be better at math and
code, and then you do this mixing procedure and it gives you the answer.
I think that's happened at labs this year; there's new hot things, whether
it's coding environments or web navigation, and you need to bring in new data,
change your whole pre-training so that your post-training can work better.
And that's like the constant evolution and the redetermining of
what they care about for their models. - Are there fun anecdotes of
what sources of data are particularly high quality that we
wouldn't expect? You mentioned Reddit sometimes can be a source. - Reddit was very useful. I
think PDFs is definitely one. - Oh, especially arXiv. - Yeah, so AI2 has run Semantic
Scholar for a long time, which is what you can say is a competitor to
Google Scholar with a lot more features. And to do this, AI2 has found
and scraped a lot of PDFs for openly accessible papers
that might not be behind the closed walled garden of a certain
publisher. So, truly open scientific PDFs. And if you sit
on all of these and you process it, you can get value out
of it. And I think that like, a lot of that style
of work has been done by the frontier labs did much
earlier. You just need to have a pretty skilled researcher that
understands how things change models; they bring it in, clean
it, and it's a lot of labor. When frontier labs scale
researchers, a lot more goes into data. If you join a
frontier lab and you want to have impact, the best way to do
it is just find new data that's better. And then, the fancy,
glamorous algorithmic things like figuring out how to make o1 is like the
sexiest thought of a scientist. It's like, "Oh, I figured out how to scale RL."
There's a group that did that, but most of the contribution is like— - On the dataset - ..."I'm gonna make the data better," or, "I'm gonna
make the infrastructure better so everyone on my team can run experiments 5% faster." - At the same time, I think it's also one of the
closest guarded secrets, what your training data is, for legal reasons. And so there's also, I
think, a lot of work that goes into hiding what your training data was
essentially. Like training the model to not give away the sources
because you have legal reasons. - The other thing, to be complete, is that
some people are trying to train on only licensed data, whereas Common Crawl
is a scrape of the whole internet. So if I host multiple websites, I'm happy to have them train language
models, but I'm not explicitly licensing what governs it. And
therefore, Common Crawl is largely unlicensed, which means that
your consent really hasn't been provided for how to use the data. There's another
idea where you can train language models only on data that has been licensed
explicitly, so that the kind of governing contract is provided, and I'm not sure
if Apertus is the copyright thing or the license thing. I know that the reason that they did it was for
an EU compliance thing, where they wanted to make sure that their model
fit one of those checks. - On that note, there's also the
distinction in licensing. Some people just purchase the license.
Let's say they buy an Amazon Kindle book, or a Manning book, and then
use that in training. That is a gray zone 'cause you paid for the content and you
might want to train on it. But then there are also restrictions where even that
shouldn't be allowed. And so that is where it gets a bit fuzzy.
And yeah, I think that is right now still a hot topic.
Big companies like OpenAI approached private companies
for their proprietary data and private companies, they become
more and more, let's say, protective of their data because they
know, "Okay, this is going to be my moat in a few years." And I do think that's
like the interesting question, where if LLMs become more commoditized, and I think
a lot of people learn about LLMs, there will be a lot more people able to train LLMs.
Of course, there are infrastructure challenges. But if you think of big
industries like pharmaceutical industries, law, finance industries,
I do think they, at some point, will hire people from other
frontier labs to build their in-house models on their proprietary
data, which will be then, again, another unlock with pre-training that is
currently not there. Because even if you wanted to, you can't get that data. You
can't get access to clinical trials most of the time and these types of things.
So, I do think scaling, in that sense, might be still pretty much
alive if you also look in domain-specific applications, because we are
still right now, in this year, just looking at general purpose LLMs on, on ChatGPT,
Anthropic and so forth. They are just general purpose, they're not even, I think,
scratching the surface of what an LLM can do if it is really specifically
trained and designed for a specific task. - I think on the data thing—this is one of the
things that happened in 2025, and we totally forget it—is Anthropic lost in
court and owed $1.5 billion to authors. Anthropic, I think,
bought thousands of books and scanned them and was cleared legally
for that because they bought the books, and that is kind of going through
the system. And then the other side, they also torrented some books, and I think this
torrenting was the path where the court said that they were then culpable to pay these
billions of dollars to authors, which is just such a mind-boggling lawsuit that
kind of just came and went. That is so much money- ... from the VC ecosystem. - These are court cases that will define the
future of human civilization, because it's clear that data drives a lot of this, and
there's this very complicated human tension of... I mean, you can
empathize. You're both authors. And there's some degree to which, I
mean, you put your heart and soul and your sweat and tears into
the writing that you do. It feels a little bit like theft
for somebody to train your data without giving you credit. - And there are, like Nathan said, also two
layers to it. Someone might buy the book and then train on it, which could be argued
fair or not fair, but then there are the straight-up
companies who use pirated books where it's not even compensating the
author. That is, I think, where people got a bit angry about it
specifically, I would say. - Yeah, but there has to be some kind of
compensation scheme. This is like moving towards- ... towards something like
Spotify streaming did- ... originally for music.
You know, what does that- ... compensation look like? You have to define those
kinds of models. You have to think through all of that. One other thing I think people are generally
curious about, I'd love to get your thoughts, as LLMs are used more and
more. If you look at even arXiv, but GitHub, more and more of
the data is generated by LLMs. What do you do in that kind of
world? How big of a problem is that? - Largest problem's the infrastructure
and systems, but from an AI point of view, it's kind of inevitable. - So it's basically LLM-generated data that's
curated by humans essentially, right? - Yes, and I think that a lot of open source
contributors are legitimately burning out. If you have a popular open source
repo, somebody's like, "Oh, I want to do open source AI. It's good for
my career," and they just vibe- -code something and they throw it
in. You might get more of this- - I have a- - - than I do. - Yeah, so I have actually
a case study here. I have a repository called
MLxtend that I developed as a student around 10 years
ago, and it is a reasonably popular library still for certain
algorithms, I think especially like frequent data mining stuff. And
there were recently two or three people who submitted a lot of
PRs in a very short amount of time. I do think LLMs have been involved
in submitting these PRs. Me, as the maintainer, there are two things. First,
I'm a bit overwhelmed. I don't have time to read through it because, especially as an
older library, that is not a priority for me. At the same time, I kind of also
appreciate it because I think something people forget is it's not just using the
LLM. There's still a human layer that verifies something, and that
is in a sense also how data is labeled, right? One of
the most expensive things is getting labeled data for
RL from human feedback phases. And this is kind of like
that, where it goes through phases, and then you actually get higher
quality data out of it. And so I don't mind it in a sense. It can feel overwhelming,
but I do think there is also value in it. - It feels like there's a fundamental
difference between raw LLM-generated data and LLM-generated data
with a human in the loop that does some kind of verification, even
if that verification is a small percent of the lines of code. - I think this goes with anything where people think also sometimes, "Oh,
yeah. I can just use an LLM to learn about XYZ," which is true. You can,
but there might be a person who is an expert who might have used
an LLM to write specific code. There is kind of like this human work
that went into it to make it nice, throwing out the not-so-nice
parts to kind of pre-digest it for you, and that saves
you time. I think that's the value-add, where you have
someone filtering things or even using the LLMs correctly.
This is still labor that you get for free. For example, if
you read a Substack article, I could maybe ask an LLM to
give me opinions on that, but I wouldn't even know what to ask.
And I think there is still value in reading that article compared to me
going to the LLM because you are the expert. You select what knowledge
is actually spot on, should be included, and you give
me this very... this executive summary. And this is
a huge value-add because now I don't have to waste three to
five hours to go through this myself, maybe get some incorrect
information and so on. And so I think that's also where the future still is for writers even though there are
LLMs that... Can kind of save you time. - It's kinda fascinating to watch.
I'm sure you guys do this, but for me, I look at the
difference between a summary and the original content. Even
if it's a page-long summary of a page-long content, it's interesting to see how the LLM-based summary
takes the edge off. What is the signal it removes from the thing? - The voice is what I talk about a lot. - Voice? Well, voice... I would love
to hear what you mean by voice, but sometimes there's literally insights. By removing an insight, you're
changing the meaning of the thing. So I'm continuously
disappointed how bad LLMs are at really getting to the core
insights, which is what a great summary does. Yet even if I have
these extremely elaborate prompts where I'm really trying to dig for the
insights, it's still not quite there, which... I mean,
that's a whole deep philosophical question about what is human knowledge
and wisdom and what does it mean to be insightful and so on. But when you talk
about the voice, what do you mean? - When I write, I think a lot
of what I'm trying to do is take what you think as a
researcher, which is very raw. A researcher is trying to encapsulate
an idea at the frontier of their understanding and they're trying
to put what is a feeling into words. I try to do this
in my writing, which makes it come across as raw but
also high-information in a way that some people will get it and some won't.
And that's the nature of research. And language models don't do
this well. They're all trained with Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback, which takes feedback from many people and averages how the
model behaves from this. And I think it's going to
be hard for a model to be very incisive when there's
that sort of filter. This is a wonderful fundamental problem
for researchers in RLHF. This provides so much utility in making
the models better, but also the problem formulation is
kind of... there's this knot in it that you can't
get past. These language models don't have this prior in their
deep expression they're trying to get at. I don't think it's impossible.
There are stories of models that really shock people. Like, I
think of... I would love to have tried Bing Sydney. Did that
have more voice? Because it would so often go off the
rails, which is historically obviously a scary way—like telling a
reporter to leave his wife—is a crazy model to potentially put in general
adoption. But that's kind of like a trade-off; is this RLHF process
in some ways adding limitations? - That's a terrifying place to be as one
of these frontier labs and companies, because millions of people are using them. - There was a lot of backlash
last year with GPT-4o getting removed, and I've personally never used
the model, but I've talked to people at OpenAI where they get emails from users that might be detecting subtle
differences in the deployments in the middle of the night. And they email
them like, "My friend is different." And they find these employees' emails
and send them things because they are so attached to this set of model weights and configuration
that is deployed to the users. We see this with TikTok. You
open it... I don't use TikTok, but supposedly in five minutes the
algorithm gets you. It's locked in. And those are language models
doing recommendations. I think there are ways you can do this. Within
five minutes of chatting with it, the model just gets you.
And that is something that people aren't really ready for.
Like, don't give that to kids. At least until we know what's happening. - But there's also going to be this
mechanism... What's going to happen with these LLMs as they're
used more and more... Unfortunately, the nature of the human
condition is such that people commit suicide. And so what journalists will do
is they will report extensively on the people who commit suicide.
And they would very likely link it to the LLMs because they have
that data about the conversations. If you're really struggling in
your life, if you're depressed, if you're thinking about suicide, you're
going to probably talk to LLMs about it. And so what journalists will do is
say, "Well, the suicide was committed because of the LLM." And that's
going to lead to the companies, because of legal issues and so on, more and more taking the edge off
of the LLM. So it's going to be as generic as possible. It's so
difficult to operate in this space because you don't want an LLM to cause
harm to humans at that level, but also this is the nature of
the human experience, is to have a rich conversation,
a fulfilling conversation, one that challenges you from which
you grow. You need that edge. And that's something extremely difficult
for AI researchers on the RLHF front to actually have to solve, because you're
dealing with the human condition. - A lot of researchers at these
companies are so well-motivated, and definitely Anthropic and OpenAI
culturally want to do good for the world. And it's such a—I'm like, "Ooh,
I don't wanna work on this," because on the one hand, a lot of
people see AI as a health ally, as somebody they can talk to about
their health confidentially, but then it bleeds all the way into this, like talking about mental
health, where it's heartbreaking that this will be the
thing where somebody goes over the edge, but other people might be saved.
And I'm like, "I don't..." As a researcher, it's like, I don't want to
train image generation models and release them openly because I don't want to
enable somebody to have a tool on their laptop that can harm other people. I don't have the infrastructure in
my company to do that safely. But there's a lot of areas like this
where it just needs people that will approach it with complexity and
conviction. It's just such a hard problem. - But also, we as a society, as users of these
technologies, need to make sure that we're having the complicated conversation
about it versus just fearmongering— that Big Tech is causing harm to
humans or stealing your data. It's more complicated than
that. And you're right. There's a very large number of people inside
these companies, many of whom I know, who deeply care about
helping people. They are considering the full human experience of
people from across the world, not just Silicon Valley. People across the United States
and the world, what their needs are. It's really difficult to
design this one system that is able to help all these different
kinds of people across different age groups, cultures, and mental states. - I wish that the timing of AI was
different relative to the relationship of Big Tech to the average person.
Big Tech's reputation was so low, and with how AI is so expensive, it's
inevitably going to be a Big Tech thing. It takes so many resources,
and people say the US is, "betting the economy on AI" with this
build-out. To have these be intertwined at the same time makes for such a
hard communication environment. It would be good for me to go talk to more
people in the world who hate Big Tech and see AI as a continuation of this. - And one of the things you recommend,
one of the antidotes that you talk about, is to find agency
in this system. As opposed to sitting back in a powerless
way and consuming the AI slop as it rapidly takes over the internet.
Find agency by using AI to build stuff, build apps, build... One, that
actually helps you build intuition, but two, it's empowering because
you can understand how it works, what the weaknesses are.
It gives your voice power to say, "This is a bad use of the
technology, and this is a good use." And you're more plugged
into the system then, so you can understand it better and
you can steer it better as a consumer. - I think that's a good point you brought up about
agency. Instead of ignoring it and saying, "Okay, I'm not going to use it,"
I think it's probably long-term healthier to say, "Okay, it's
out there. I can't put it back." when they came out. How do
I make best use of it, and how does it help me to up-level myself?
The one thing I worry about here, though, is, if you just fully use it for something
you love to do, the thing you love to do is no longer there. And that could
potentially, I feel, lead to burnout. For example, if I use an LLM
to do all my coding for me, now there's no coding. I'm just managing
something that is coding for me. Two years later, let's say, if I
just do that eight hours a day, having something code for me,
do I feel fulfilled still? Is this hurting me in terms of being excited
about my job, excited about what I'm doing? Am I still proud to build something? - On that topic of enjoyment, it's quite
interesting. We should just throw this in there, that there's this recent survey of about 791 professional developers, meaning
10-plus years of experience. - That's a long time. As a junior developer? - Yeah, in this day and age.
So, there's also many fronts that are surprising. They break it down by junior and senior developers.
But, I mean, it just shows that both junior and senior developers
use AI-generated code in code they ship. So this is not just for fun or
intermediate learning things. This is code they ship.
25%—like, most of them use around 50% or more.
And what's interesting is, for the category of over 50%
of your code that you ship is AI-generated, senior
developers are much more likely to do so. But you don't want AI
to take away the thing you love. I think this speaks to my experience,
these results I'm about to say. Together, about 80% of people
find it either somewhat more enjoyable or significantly more
enjoyable to use AI as part of the work. - I think it depends on the task. From
my personal usage, for example, I have a website where I
sometimes tweak things. I personally don't enjoy
this. So in that sense, if the AI can help me to implement
something on my website, I'm all for it. It's great. But then, at the same
time, when I solve a complex problem— well, if there's a bug,
and I hunt this bug, and I find it, it's the best feeling
in the world. You feel great. But now, if you don't
even think about the bug, you just go directly to the LLM, well, you
never have this kind of feeling, right? But then there could be
the middle ground where, well, you try yourself, you
can't find it, you use the LLM, and then you don't get frustrated because it helps
you and you move on to something that you enjoy. And so, looking at these statistics,
I think what is not factored in is that it's averaging over
all the different scenarios. We don't know if it's for the core task or if it's for something mundane that
people would not have enjoyed otherwise. So, in a sense, AI is really great for doing
mundane things that take a lot of work. For example, my wife the
other day—she has a podcast for book discussions, a book club, and
she was transferring the show notes from Spotify to YouTube, and then
the links somehow broke. And she had in some episodes, because
it is so many books, like 100 links, and it would have been really painful to
go in there and fix each link manually. So I suggested, "Hey, let's try ChatGPT."
We copied the text into ChatGPT, and it fixed them. Instead of two hours going from link to link fixing
that, it made that type of work much more seamless.
I think everyone has a use case where AI is useful
for something that would be really boring, really mundane. - For me personally, since we're talking about
coding, and you mentioned debugging... the source of enjoyment for me, more
on the Cursor side than Claude Code, is that I have a friend, I have
a pair programmer. It's less lonely. You made debugging
sound like this great joy. No, I would say debugging
is like a drink of water after you've been
going through a desert for days. You skip the whole desert part where you're suffering.
Sometimes it's nice to have a friend who can't really find the bug,
but can give you some intuition about the code, and together you're going through the desert and finding
that drink of water. At least for me, maybe it speaks to the loneliness
of the programming experience. That is a source of joy. - It's maybe also related to delayed
gratification. I'm a person who, even as a kid, I liked
the idea of Christmas presents—having them, getting
them—better than actually receiving the presents. I would
look forward to the day I get the presents, but then it's over and I'm
disappointed. And maybe it's the same with food. I think food tastes
better when you're really hungry. You're right, with debugging,
it is not always great. It's often frustrating, but then if
you can solve it, then it's great. But there's a sweet Goldilocks
zone; if it's too hard, then it's just wasting your time. But I think another challenge is how
will people learn? We looked at the chart and
saw that more senior developers are shipping more
AI-generated code than the junior ones. It's very interesting, because intuitively
you would think it's the junior developers because they don't know
how to do the thing yet, and so they use AI to do that
thing. It could mean the AI is not good enough yet to solve that
task, but it could also mean experts are more effective
at using it. They know how to use it better, review the code,
and then they trust the code more. One issue for society in the future
will be: how do you become an expert if you never try to do the thing
yourself? One way I always learned is by trying things myself. If you
look at math textbooks and the solutions, you learn something,
but you learn actually better if you try first. Then you
appreciate the solution differently because you know how to put it
into your mental framework. If LLMs are here all the time, would
you actually go to the length of struggling? Would you be willing to
struggle? Struggle is not nice, right? But if you use the LLM to do everything, at
some point you will never really take the next step, and then you will maybe not get that unlock that
you would get as an expert using an LLM. So, I think there's
like a Goldilocks sweet spot where maybe the trick
here is you make dedicated offline time where you study two hours
a day, and the rest of the day use LLMs. But I think it's important
also for people to still invest in themselves, in my opinion,
to not just LLM everything. - Yeah, as a civilization, we each individually
have to find that Goldilocks zone. And in the programming context as
developers. Now, we've had this fascinating conversation that started with
pre-training and mid-training. Let's get to post-training.
A lot of fun stuff in post-training. So, what are some of the
interesting ideas in post-training? - The biggest one from 2025 is learning this reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards. You can scale up the training there, which means doing a lot of
this kind of iterative generate-grade loop, and that lets the
models learn both interesting behaviors on the tool use and software
side. This could be searching, running commands on their own and seeing the
outputs, and then also that training enables this inference time
scaling very nicely. And it just turned out that this paradigm was
very nicely linked, where this kind of RL training enables inference time
scaling. But inference time scaling could have been found in different ways. So, it was kind of
this perfect storm where the models change a lot, and the way that they're trained is a major
factor in doing so. And this has changed how people approach
post-training dramatically. - Can you describe RLVR, popularized by
DeepSeek R1? Can you describe how it works? - Yeah. Fun fact: I was on the
team that came up with the term RLVR, which is from our Tulu
3 work before DeepSeek. We don't take a lot of credit for being
the people to popularize the scaling RL, but as fun as what
academics get, as an aside, is the ability
to name and influence the discourse, because the closed
labs can only say so much. That one of the things you can do as an academic is
you might not have the compute to train the model, but you can frame things
in a way that ends up being described as a community coming
together around this RLVR term, which is very fun. And then DeepSeek are the
people that did the training breakthrough, which is, they scaled the
reinforcement learning. You have the model generate answers and
then grade the completion if it was right, and then that accuracy is your reward for reinforcement learning.
So reinforcement learning is classically an agent that acts in an
environment, and the environment gives it a state and a reward back,
and you try to maximize this reward. In the case of language
models, the reward is normally accuracy on a set of verifiable
tasks, whether it's math problems or coding tasks. And it
starts to get blurry with things like factual domains. That is also,
in some ways, verifiable, or constraints on your instruction,
like respond only with words that start with A." All of
these things are verifiable in some way, and the core
idea of this is you find a lot more of these problems that are
verifiable and you let the model try it many times while taking
these RL steps, these RL gradient updates. The
infrastructure evolved from reinforcement learning from human
feedback, where in that era the score they were trying to optimize was
a learned reward model of human preferences. So you kind of changed
the problem domains and that let the optimization go on to
much bigger scales, which kind of kickstarted a major change in what the
models can do and how people use them. - What kind of domains is RLVR amenable to? - Math and code are the famous
ones, and then there's a lot of work on what is called the rubrics,
which is related to a word people might have heard: LLM-as-a-judge.
For each problem, I'll have a set of problems in my
dataset. I will then have an LLM and ask it, "What would a good
answer to this problem look like?" And then you could try the
problem over and over again and assign a score based on this rubric.
That's not necessarily verifiable like math and code domains, but
this rubrics idea and other scientific problems that might be
a little bit more vague is where the attention is, where they're trying
to push this set of methods into these kind of more open-ended domains
so the models can learn a lot more. - I think that's called reinforcement
learning with AI feedback, right? - That's the older term for it coined
in Anthropic's Constitutional AI paper. It's like a lot of
these things come in cycles. - Also, just one step back
for RLVR. I think the interesting thing here is that
you ask the LLM a, let's say, math question, and then you know the
correct answer, and you let the LLM, as you said, figure it out. How
it does it—you don't constrain it much. There are some constraints like
"use the same language, don't switch between Spanish and English." But let's
say you're pretty much hands-off. You only give the question and
the answer, and then the LLM has the task to arrive at the
right answer, but the beautiful thing here is what
happens in practice: the LLM will do a step-by-step description,
like as a student or as a mathematician would derive the
solution. It will use those steps, and that helps the model to
improve its own accuracy. And then, like you said,
the inference scaling. Inference scaling loosely
means spending more compute during inference, and here
the inference scaling is that the model would use more tokens.
In the DeepSeek R1 paper, they showed the longer they train the
model, the longer the responses are. They grow over time. They use more
tokens, so it becomes more expensive. It becomes expensive for simple tasks,
but these explanations help accuracy. There are also papers showing
what the model explains does not necessarily have to be
correct or maybe it's unrelated to the answer, but for some reason, it
still helps the model that it is explaining. And I think it's
also—again, I don't want to anthropomorphize these LLMs, but it's
kind of like how we humans operate. If there's a complex math
problem in a math class, class, you usually have a note paper and
you do it step by step. You cross out things. And the model also self-corrects,
and that was, I think, the aha moment in the DeepSeek R1 paper. They called
it the aha moment because the model itself recognized it made a mistake and then said,
"Ah, I did something wrong, let me try again." And I think that's just
so cool that this falls out of just giving it the correct answer
and having it figure out how to do it, that it kind of does in a
sense what a human would do. Although LLMs don't think like humans, it's
kind of like an interesting coincidence and it... And the other nice
side effect is it's great for us humans often to see these steps.
It builds trust, but also we us humans to see these steps. It builds trust,
but also we learn and can double check things. - There's a lot in here. I think some of the debate... There's been a lot of
debate this year on if the language models like these... I think the aha moments
are kind of fake because in pre-training you essentially have
seen the whole internet. so you have definitely seen people
explaining their work, even verbally, like a transcript of a math lecture. "You try
this, oh, I messed this up." And what RLVR is very good at doing is amplifying these behaviors because they're very useful
in enabling the model to think longer and to check its work. And I agree that
it is very beautiful that this training kind of... The model learns to amplify
this in a way that is so useful for the final answers being better. - I can give you also a hands-on example. I
was training the Qwen 3 base model with RLVR on MATH-500. The base model had an
accuracy of about 15%. Just 50 steps, like in a few minutes with
RLVR, the model went from 15% to 50% accuracy. And the
model... You can't tell me it's learning anything
fundamentally about math in - The Qwen example is weird because there've been
two papers this year, one of which I was on, about data contamination in Qwen and specifically that they train on a
lot of this special mid-training phase that we should take a minute
on, because it's weird because they train on problems
that are almost identical to MATH. - Exactly. And so you can
see that basically the RL, it's not teaching the model any new knowledge
about math. You can't do that in 50 steps. So the knowledge is already there, in the
pre-training, you're just unlocking it. - I still disagree with the premise because
there's a lot of weird complexities that you can't prove because one of the things that points to weirdness is
that if you take the Qwen 3 so-called base model and you... You
could Google like "math dataset, Hugging Face", and you could take
a problem and what you do if you put it into Qwen 3 base... All these math problems
have words, so it'd be like "Alice has five apples and takes one... and gives
three to whoever," and there are these word problems. With these Qwen-based
models, why people are suspicious of them is if you change the
numbers but keep the words- Qwen will produce, without
tools, will produce a very high accuracy decimal representation of the answer, which means there's
some... At some time, it was shown problems that were almost identical
to the test set, and it was using tools to get a very high precision answer,
but a language model without tools will never actually have this.
So it's kind of been this big debate in the research community:
how much of these reinforcement learning papers that are training on Qwen
and measuring specifically on this math benchmark, where there's been multiple
papers talking about contamination, is like, how much can you believe them? And I think
this is what caused the reputation of RLVR being about formatting, because you
can get these gains so quickly, therefore it must already be in the model. But
there's a lot of complexity here that we... It's not really like controlled
experimentation, so we don't really know. - But if it weren't true, I would say
distillation wouldn't work, right? I mean, distillation can work to
some extent, but the thing is that is, I think, the biggest problem, and I research this
contamination because we don't know what's in the data. Unless you have a new dataset,
it is really impossible. And the same, you mentioned the math dataset,
where you have a question and then answer and an explanation is given,
but then also even something simpler like MMLU, which is a multiple-choice
benchmark. If you just change the format slightly,
like, I don't know, if you use a dot instead of a parenthesis
or something like that, the model accuracy will vastly differ. - I think that that could be like a model
issue rather than a general issue. - It's not even malicious by the developers of the LLM,
like, "Hey, we want to cheat at that benchmark." It has seen something at some point. I
think the only fair way to evaluate an LLM is to have a new benchmark that is after
the cutoff date when the LLM was deployed. - Can we lay out what would
be the recipe of all the things that go into post-training?
And you mentioned RLVR was a really exciting, effective thing. Maybe we should elaborate. RLHF
still has a really important component to play. What kind of other
ideas are there on post-training? - I think you can kind of take
this in order. I think you could view it as what made o1, which
is this first reasoning model, possible, or what will the
latest model be? And they actually... You're going to have
similar interventions at these, where you start with mid-training,
and the thing that is rumored to enable o1 and similar
models is really careful data curation, where you're providing
a broad set of what is called reasoning traces, which
is just the model generating words in a forward process
that is reflecting, like breaking down a problem into intermediate steps
and trying to solve them. So at mid-training, you need to have data that is similar to this to make it
so that when you move into post-training, primarily with these verifiable
rewards, it can learn. And then what is happening
today is you're figuring out which problems to
give the model and how out which problems to give the model and how long
you can train it for and how much inference you can enable the model to use when solving
these verifiable problems. So as models get better, certain problems models get better, certain problems are no longer...
The model will solve them 100% of the time, and therefore there's very little signal
in this. If we look at the GRPO equation, this one is famous for
this because essentially the reward given to the agent
is based on how good a given action—an action is a
completion—is relative to the other answers to that same problem. So if all the problems
get the same answer, there's no signal in these types of algorithms. So what they're doing
is they're finding harder problems, which is why you hear about things like
scientific domains, where it's so hard to get anything right. If you
have a lab or something, it just generates so many tokens or much
harder software problems. So the frontier models are all pushing into these
harder domains when they can train on more problems and the model will learn
more skills at once. The RLHF link to this is that RLHF has been
and still is kind of like the finishing touch on the models, where
it makes the models more useful by improving the organization or style
or tone. There are different things that resonate with different audiences, like some
people like a really quirky model and RLHF could be good at enabling that
personality, and some people hate this markdown bulleted list
thing that the models do, but it's actually really good for quickly
parsing information. In RLHF, this human feedback stage is
really great for putting this into the model at the end of
the day. It's what made ChatGPT so magical for people. And that
use has actually remained fairly stable. This formatting can also help the models get better at math
problems, for example. So it's like the border between style
and formatting, and like the method that you use
to answer a problem is actually all very closely
linked in terms of when you're training these models, which is
why RLHF can still make a model better at math, but these verifiable domains
are a much more direct process to doing this because it makes
more sense with the problem formulation, which is why it ends up all
forming together. But to summarize, it's like mid-training is give the model
the skills it needs to then learn. RL with verifiable
rewards is letting the model try a lot of times, so put a lot of compute
into trial-and-error learning across hard problems. And then RLHF would be like
finishing the model, making it easy to use and kind of just
rounding the model out. - Can you comment on the amount
of compute required for RLVR? - It's only gone up and up.
I think Ilya Sutskever was famous for saying they use a similar
amount of compute for pre-training and post-training. Back to the scaling
discussion, they involve very different hardware for scaling. Pre-training
is very compute-bound, which is like this FLOPs discussion, which is just how many matrix
multiplications can you get through at once. And because with RL you're generating
these answers, you're trying the model in real-world environments, it ends
up being much more memory-bound because you're generating long sequences
and the attention mechanisms have this behavior where you get a
quadratic increase in memory as you're getting to longer sequences.
So the compute becomes very different. In pre-training we would talk about a
model—if we go back to like the Biden administration executive order, it's
like 10 to the 25th FLOPs to train a model. If you're using FLOPs in
post-training, it's a lot weirder because the reality is just like: how many hours
are you allocating? How many GPUs for? And I think in terms
of time, the RL compute is getting much closer because you just
can't put it all into one system. Pre-training is so computationally dense where
all the GPUs are talking to each other and it's extremely efficient, whereas RL has all
these moving parts and can take a long time to generate a sequence of
100,000 tokens. If you think about GPT-5.2 Pro taking an hour,
it's like, what if your training run has a sample for an hour and you have to
make sure that's handled efficiently? So I think in GPU hours
or just wall-clock hours, the RL runs are probably approaching the
same number of days as pre-training, but they probably aren't using
as many GPUs at the same time. There are rules of thumb where in
labs you don't want your pre-training runs to last more than a month because
they fail catastrophically. And if you are planning a huge cluster to be
held for two months and then it fails on day 50, the opportunity
costs are just so big. So people don't want to put
all their eggs in one basket. GPT-4 was the ultimate YOLO
run, and nobody ever wanted to do it before, where it took three months
to train and everybody was shocked that it worked. I think people are a little
bit more cautious and incremental now. - So RLVR is more, let's say, unlimited in how much you can train or still get benefit,
where RLHF, because it's a preference tuning, you reach a certain point where it
doesn't really make sense to spend more RL budget on that. So just a step
back with preference tuning: there are multiple people that
can give multiple, let's say, explanations for the same thing and they can both
be correct, but at some point you learn a certain style and it doesn't make
sense to iterate on it. My favorite example is: if relatives
ask me what laptop they should buy, I give them an explanation or
ask, "What is your use case?" They, for example,
prioritize battery life and storage. Other people like us, for
example, we would prioritize RAM and compute. Both answers are
correct, but different people require different answers. With preference
tuning, you're trying to average somehow. You are asking the data labelers
to give you, not the right, but the preferred answer and then you
train on that. But at some point you learn that average preferred answer.
And there's no reason to keep training longer on it because it's
just a style, whereas with RLVR, you let the model solve more and more complex, difficult problems. So I
think it makes more sense to allocate more budget long-term to RLVR. Also,
right now we are in an RLVR 1.0 blend where it's still that simple
thing where we have a question and answer, but we don't do anything
with the stuff in between. There were multiple research
papers, also by Google for example, on process reward models that
also give scores for the explanation—how correct is the
explanation. And I think that will be the next thing, let's say
RLVR 2.0 for this year, focusing in between question and
answer, like how to leverage that information, the explanation,
to help it get better accuracy. So that's one angle.
And there was a DeepSeek Math-V2 paper where they also had interesting inference scaling
there where, first, they had developed models that grade
themselves, a separate model. And I think that will be one aspect. And
the other, like Nathan mentioned, it will be for RLVR branching into other domains. - The place where people are
excited are value functions, which is pretty similar. So process
reward models are kind of like... Process reward models assign how good something is at each
intermediate step in a reasoning process, where value functions apply
value to every token the language model generates. Both of these have
been largely unproven in the language modeling and reasoning model era.
People are more optimistic about value functions for whatever
reason now. I think process reward models were tried a lot more
in this pre-o1, pre-reasoning model era, and a lot of people had a lot of
headaches with them. So I think a lot of it is human nature... Value models have a very deep history in
reinforcement learning. They're one of the first things core to deep
reinforcement learning existing, is training value models. So
right now people are excited about trying value models, but there's
very little proof. And there are negative examples in trying to scale
up process reward models. These things don't always hold
in the future. We came to this discussion by talking about scaling.
The simple way to summarize what you're saying is you don't want to do too much
RLHF, where the signal doesn't scale. People have worked on RLHF for language
models for years, especially with intense interest after ChatGPT.
And the first release of a reasoning model trained with
RLVR, OpenAI's o1, had a scaling plot where if you increase training
compute logarithmically, you get a linear increase in evaluations. This has been
reproduced multiple times. DeepSeek had a plot like this. But there's no
scaling law for RLHF where if you log-increase the compute, you get
performance. In fact, the seminal scaling paper for RLHF is scaling laws for
reward model over-optimization. So that's a big line to
draw with RLVR and the methods we have now. In the future,
they will follow this scaling paradigm: where you can let
the best runs run for an extra 10x and you get performance,
but you can't do this with RLHF. And that is just going to be
field-defining in how people approach them. While I'm a shill for
people to academically do RLHF, to do the best RLHF you might not need the extra 10 or 100x of
compute, but to do the best RLVR you do. I think
there's a seminal paper from a Meta internship. It's
called something like "The Art of Scaling Reinforcement Learning with
Language Models." What they describe as a framework is Scale-RL. Their
incremental experiment was like 10,000 V100 hours,
which is like thousands or tens of thousands of dollars per
experiment. They do a lot of them, and This cost is not accessible to the average academic, which is a
hard equilibrium where it's trying to figure out how
to learn from each community. - I was wondering if we could take
a bit of a tangent and talk about education and learning.
If you're someone listening to this who's a smart person
interested in programming and AI, I presume building something
from scratch is a good beginning. So can you take me through what
you would recommend people do? - I would personally start, like you
said, implementing a simple model from scratch that you can run on
your computer. The goal is not, when you build a model from scratch,
to have something for every day use. It's not going to be your
personal assistant replacing an existing open-weight model or
ChatGPT. It's to see what exactly goes into the LLM, what comes out,
and how the pre-training works on your own computer, preferably. Then you learn about pre-training,
supervised fine-tuning, and the attention mechanism. You get a solid
understanding of how things work, but at some point you reach a limit, because
small models can only do so much. The problem with learning about
LLMs at scale is that it's exponentially more complex
to make a larger model, because the model isn't just
larger—you have to shard your parameters across multiple GPUs. Even
for the KV cache, there are multiple ways to implement it. One is just to
understand how it works, just to grow the cache. You grow it step-by-step
by, let's say, concatenating lists, but then that
wouldn't be optimal on GPUs. You would pre-allocate
a tensor and then fill it in. But that adds another 20 or 30
lines of code. And for each thing, you add so much code. The goal with
the book is basically to understand how the LLM works. It's not going to be a
production-level LLM, but once you have that, you can understand
the production-level LLM. - So you're trying to always build an
LLM that's going to fit on one GPU? - Yes. Most of them do. I have
some bonus materials on some MoE models. One or two of them
may require multiple GPUs, but the goal is to have it on one
GPU. And the beautiful thing is, you can self-verify. It's almost
like RLVR. When you code these from scratch, you can take an existing
model from the Hugging Face Transformers library. The
library is great, but if you want to learn about LLMs, it's not
the best place to start because the code is so complex to
fit so many use cases. Because people use it in production,
it has to be really sophisticated, really intertwined, and hard
to read. It's not linear. - It started as a fine-tuning
library, and then it grew to be the standard representation of
every model architecture. Hugging Face is the default place to get a
model, and Transformers is the software. It enables it so people can easily load
a model and do something basic with it. - And all frontier labs that have
open-weight models have a Transformers version of it, like from DeepSeek
to gpt-oss-120b. That's the canonical weight format
you can load. But even even Transformers, the library, is
not used in production. People use SGLang or vLLM, and it adds
another layer of complexity. - We should say that the Transformers
library has like 400 models. - So it's the one library that tries
to implement a lot of LLMs, and so you have a huge codebase,
basically. It's huge. It's like, I don't know, maybe millions— - That's crazy. - hundreds of thousands of lines
of code. Understanding the part you want to understand is finding the needle
in the haystack. But what's beautiful is you have a working implementation, so
you can work backwards. What I would recommend doing, or what I also do, is if I
want to understand, for example, how OLMo is implemented, I would look at the
weights in the model hub, the config file, and then you can see, "Oh,
they used so many layers. They use, let's say, Group Query Attention
or Multi-Head Attention in that case." Then you see all the components in a
human-readable, 100-line config file. And then you start, let's say, with
your GPT-2 model and add these things. The cool thing here is you can
then load the pretrained weights and see if they work in your
model. You want to match the same output that you get with a Transformer
model, and then you can use that, basically as a verifiable reward
to make your architecture correct. Sometimes it takes me a day. With
OLMo 3, the challenge was RoPE for the position embeddings.
They had a YaRN extension and there was some custom scaling there, and I couldn't quite match
these things. In this struggle, you kind of understand things. At the
end, you know you have it correct because you can unit test it. You
can check against the reference implementation. I think that's one
of the best ways to learn, really. To basically reverse-engineer something. - I think that is something everyone
interested in getting into AI today should do. That's why
I liked your book. I came to language models from the RL and
robotics field. I had never taken the time to just learn all the fundamentals. This transformer architecture
is so fundamental, just as deep learning was in the past,
and people need to do this. I think where a lot of
people get overwhelmed is, "How do I apply this to have
impact or find a career path?" Because language models make this
fundamental stuff so accessible, and people with motivation
will learn it. Then it's like, "How do I get cycles on goal
to contribute to research?" I'm actually fairly optimistic
because the field moves so fast that a lot of times the best
people don't fully solve a problem because there's a bigger problem to
solve that's very low-hanging fruit, so they move on. I think that a lot
of what I was trying to do in this RLHF book is take post-training
techniques and describe how people think about them influencing
the model and what people are doing. Then it's remarkable how many things I just think people stop
studying or don't pursue. I think people trying to go narrow
after doing the fundamentals is good, and then reading the relevant papers and being engaged in the ecosystem.
It's like you actually... actually... The proximity that
random people online have to the leading researchers—no
one knows who all the... The anonymous accounts on X and ML are
very popular, and no one knows who all these people are. It could just be random people
that study this stuff deeply, especially with the AI tools. To just be like, "I don't
understand this, keep digging into it," is a very useful thing. But there's
a lot of research areas that maybe have three papers that
you need to read, and then one of the authors will probably email
you back. But you have to put in a lot of effort into these emails to
understand the field. I think it would be for a newcomer easily weeks
of work to feel like they can truly grasp what is a very
narrow area, but I think going narrow after you have the fundamentals
will be very useful to people because I've become very interested in
character training, which is how you make the model funny or
sarcastic or serious, and what do you do to the
data to do this? A student at Oxford reached out to me and was like, "Hey,
I'm interested in this," and I advised him. And that paper now exists.
There's like two or three people in the world that were very
interested in this. He's a PhD student, which gives him an advantage, but for me, that was a topic I was waiting for
someone to be like, "Hey, I have time to spend cycles on this." I'm sure there's a lot more
very narrow things where you're just like, "It doesn't make sense that there was
no answer to this." I think it's just there's so much information coming that
people are like, "I can't grab onto any of these," but if you just stick in an area, I think
there's a lot of interesting things to learn. - Yeah, I think you can't try to do it all
because it would be very overwhelming and you would burn out. For me, for
example, I haven't kept up with computer vision in a long time; I just focused
on LLMs. But coming back to your book, I think this is a really great book and
a really good bang for the buck because if you want to learn about RLHF, I
wouldn't go out there and read RLHF papers because you would
be spending two years— - Some of them contradict. I've just edited the book, and there's
no chapter where I had to be like, "X papers say one thing and Y papers
say another, and we'll see what comes out to be true." - Just to go through the table of contents, what
are some ideas we might have missed in the bigger picture of post-training? First of
all, you did the problem setup, training overview, what are preferences,
preference data, and the optimization tools, reward modeling,
regularization, instruction tuning, rejection sampling, and
reinforcement learning. Then, Constitutional AI and AI feedback,
reasoning, and inference-time scaling to use in function calling,
synthetic data and distillation, evaluation, and then an
open questions section, over-optimization, style and
information, and then product UX, character and post-training.
What are some ideas worth mentioning that connect both the
educational and the research components? You mentioned character training,
which is pretty interesting. - Character training is interesting because there's
so little on it. We talked about how people engage with these models. We
feel good using them because they're positive, but that can go too far;
it can be too positive. And it's like, essentially, it's: How
do you change your data and decision-making to make it
exactly what you want? And like, OpenAI has this thing called a model
spec, which is essentially their internal guideline for what they want the
model to do, and they publish this to developers. So, essentially, you
can know what is a failure of OpenAI's training—where they have the
intentions and they haven't met them yet— versus what is something that they actually
wanted to do and that you don't like. And that transparency is very nice,
but all the methods for curating these documents and how easy it is to follow
them is not very well known. I think the way the book is designed is that the RL
chapter is obviously what people want because everybody hears about it with RLVR, and
it's the same algorithms and the same math, but you can use it in
very different documents. So I think the core of
RLHF is like how messy preferences are. It's essentially
a rehash of a paper I wrote years ago, but this is essentially
the chapter that'll tell you why RLHF is never ever fully solvable because, the way that even RL is set up, it
assumes that preferences can be quantified and that multiple
preferences can be reduced to single values. And I think it relates
in the economics literature to the Von Neumann-Morgenstern utility theorem,
and that is the chapter where all of that philosophical,
economic, and psychological context tells you what gets compressed
into doing RLHF. So it's like you have all of this and then later in the book
it's like: You use this RL map to make the number go up. And I think that's why
it'll be very rewarding for people to do research on, because quantifying
preferences is something that humans have designed
a problem in order to make preferences studyable. But there's
kind of fundamental debates, like, an example is in a language model response you
have different things you care about, like accuracy or style. And when you're
collecting the data, they all get compressed into: "I like this more
than another." And that is happening, and there's a lot of
research in other areas of the world that go into how you
should actually do this. I think social choice theory is the subfield of economics around how
you should aggregate preferences. And I went to a workshop
that published a white paper on: "How can you think about
using social choice theory for RLHF?" So I mostly would want people
that get excited about the math to come and find things where they
could stumble into this broader context. I think there's a fun thing:
I just keep a list of all the tech reports of reasoning models
I like. So in Chapter 14, where there's a short summary of RLVR,
there's just a gigantic table where I list every single reasoning
model that I like. I think in education, a lot of it needs
to be like, at this point, what I like, because the language models are so
good at the math. For example, the famous paper, Direct Preference Optimization,
which is a much simpler way of solving the problem than RL. The derivations
in the appendix skip steps of math. And for this book, I redid
the derivations and I'm like, "What the heck is this log trick
that they use to change the math?" But doing it with language models, they're
like, "This is the log trick." And I'm like, "I don't know if I like this,
that the math is so commoditized." I think some of the struggle
in reading this appendix- ...and following the math
is good for learning. - Yeah, we're returning to this
often on the topic of education. You both have brought up the
word "struggle" quite a bit. So there is value. If you're not
struggling as part of this process, you're not fully following the
proper process for learning. proper process for learning, I suppose. - Some providers are working on models
for education designed to not give- actually, I haven't used them, but I'd
guess they're designed to not give all the information at once. And make people work for it. Training models
to do this would be a wonderful contribution. Where, like all of the stuff in the book,
you had to reevaluate every decision. decision for it- It's a great example.
There's a chance we work on it at Ai2, which I thought would be so fun. - It makes sense. I did something like
that the other day for video games. Sometimes for pastime I play
video games, like I like- Video games with puzzles, like
Zelda and Metroid. And there's this new game where I really got
stuck and was okay with it. I don't want to struggle for
two days, so I used an LLM. But then you say, "Hey, please don't add
spoilers. Just, you know, I'm here and there. What do I have to do next?" You can do
the same thing for math where you say, "Okay, I'm stuck at this point.
Don't give me the full solution, but what is something I could try?"
Where you carefully probe it. But the problem here is I
think it requires discipline. Many people enjoy math, but
there are also a lot of people who need to do it for their homework,
and then it's like a shortcut. We could develop an educational LLM,
but other LLMs are still there, and there's still a temptation
to use the other LLMs. - I think many people in college understand
the stuff they're passionate about- about- ...they're self-aware and they
understand it shouldn't be easy. I think we just have to
develop a good taste- ...talk about research
taste, school taste about stuff that you should be struggling on- ...and stuff you shouldn't be. It's tricky,
because you don't have good long-term vision sometimes you don't have
good long-term vision about what would be actually
useful to you in your career. But you have to develop that taste, yeah. - I was talking to my fiancee
or friends about this, there's this brief 10-year window
where all of the homework and all the exams could be digital. Before that, everybody
had to do all the exams in blue books because there was no other way. And now after AI,
everyone's going to need to be in blue books and oral exams because everyone could cheat so easily.
It's like this brief generation that had a different education system
where everything could be digital, but you still couldn't
cheat. And now it's just going back. It's just very funny. - You mention character training.
Just zooming out on a more general topic, for that project
how much compute was required? And in general,
to contribute as a researcher, are there places where not too much compute is required where you can
actually contribute as an individual researcher? - For the character training thing, I think
this research is built on fine-tuning about 7 billion parameter
models with LoRA, which is essentially only fine-tuning a small
subset of the weights of the model. I don't know exactly how many
GPU hours that would take. - But it's doable. - Not doable for every academic. The
situation for some academics is so dire that the only work you can do is doing
inference where you have closed models or open models and you get completions from them
and you can look at them and understand the models. And that's very well-suited
to evaluation, where you want to be the best at creating representative problems that the models fail on or
show certain abilities, which I think that you can break through
with this. I think that the top-end goal for a researcher
working on evaluation, if you want to have career momentum, is
that Frontier Labs pick up your evaluation. You don't need to have
every project do this. But if you go from a small university with no compute and
find something that Claude struggles with, and then the next Claude model has
it in the blog post, there's your career rocket ship. I think
that's hard, but if you want to scope the maximum possible impact
with minimum compute, it's something like that, which is just get very narrow
and it takes learning of where the models are going. So you need
to build a tool that tests where Claude 4.5 will fail.
If I'm going to start a research project, I need to think where the
models in eight months are going to be struggling. - But what about developing
totally novel ideas? - This is a trade-off. I think that if you're
doing a PhD, you could also be like, "It's too risky to work in language
models. I'm going way longer term," which is like what is— what is the thing that's going to define
language model development in 10 years? I end up being a person that's
pretty practical. I mean, I went to my PhD where it was like, "I got into Berkeley.
Worst case, I get a master's, and then I go work in tech." I'm very
practical about it, so I'm like the life afforded to people to work at
these AI companies, the amount of... OpenAI's average compensation is over
a million dollars in stock a year per employee. For any normal
person in the US, to get into this AI lab is transformative for
your life. So I'm pretty practical about it. there's still a lot of upward mobility
working in language models if you're focused. And look at these jobs.
But from a research perspective, the transformative impact in these academic awards... to be the next
Yann LeCun is from not working on— not caring about language
model development very much. - It's a big financial
sacrifice in that case. - So I work with some awesome students, and
they're like, "Should I go work at an AI lab?" And I'm like, "You're getting
a PhD at a top school. Are you gonna leave to go to a lab?" I don't
know. If you go work at a top lab, I don't blame you. Don't go work at some random
startup that might go to zero. But if you're going to OpenAI, I'm like, "It could
be worth leaving a PhD for." - Let's more rigorously think
through this. So where would you give a recommendation for people to do
a research contribution? So the options are academia: get a PhD.
Spend five years publishing. Compute resources are
constrained. There's— there's research labs that are more
focused on open-weight models, and working there. Or closed
frontier research labs. So OpenAI, Anthropic, xAI, and so on. - The two gradients are: the more closed,
the more money you tend to get, but you also get less
credit. In terms of building a portfolio of things that
you've done, it's very clear what you have done as an academic.
Versus if you are going to trade this fairly reasonable progression for being a cog in the
machine, which could also be very fun. So I think it's very different
career paths. But the opportunity cost for being a researcher
is very high because PhD students are paid essentially nothing. So it ends
up rewarding people that have a fairly stable safety net, and they
realize that they can operate in the long term, wanting to do very interesting
work and get a very interesting job. So it is a privileged position to be like, "I'm gonna see out my PhD and figure it
out after because I want to do this." At the same time, the academic ecosystem
is getting bombarded by funding getting cut and stuff. So there's just
so many different trade-offs where I understand plenty of people that are like,
"I don't enjoy it. I can't deal with this funding search. My grant got cut
for no reason by the government," or, "I don't know what's gonna
happen." So I think there's a lot of uncertainty and trade-offs
that, in my opinion, favor just taking the well-paying job with
meaningful impact. It's not like you're getting paid to sit around at OpenAI.
You're building the cutting edge of things that are— changing millions of
people's relationship to tech. - But publication-wise, they're being
more secretive, increasingly so. So you're publishing less and
less. And so you are having a positive impact at scale, but
you're a cog in the machine. - I think it honestly
hasn't changed that much. I have been in academia. I'm
not in academia anymore. wouldn't want to miss my time in academia.
But what I wanted to say before I get to that is that I think it hasn't changed
that much. I was working in computational biology, using
AI or machine learning methods with collaborators, and a lot of
people went from academia directly to Google. And I think it's the
same. Back then, professors were sad that their students went into industry because they couldn't carry on their
legacy. I think it's the same. It hasn't changed that much.
The only thing that has changed is the scale. Cool
stuff was always developed in industry that was closed.
You couldn't talk about it. And I think the difference
now is your preference. Do you like to publish your
work, or are you more in a closed lab? That's one difference.
The compensation, of course, is another, but it's
always been like that. It depends on where you feel
comfortable. And nothing is forever. Right now, there's
a third option, which is launching a startup. A lot
of people are doing that. It's a very risky move, but it can be a high-risk, high-reward situation,
whereas joining an industry lab is pretty safe. You also
have upward mobility. I think once you've been at an
industry lab, it's easier to find future jobs. But then again,
how much do you enjoy the team and working on proprietary
things versus how much you like publishing work? I mean,
publishing is stressful. Acceptance rates at
conferences can be arbitrary and very frustrating, but it's
high reward if you have a paper published. You feel good because your name
is on there. It's a high accomplishment. - I feel like my friends who are professors
seem happier than those who work at a frontier lab, to be honest.
There's a grounding there. The frontier labs
definitely do this 9-9-6, which is shorthand for
working all the time. - Can you describe 9-9-6? It's a
culture invented, I believe, in China and adopted in Silicon Valley.
What is 9-9-6? It's 9:00 AM to 9:00 PM, - Six days a week. - six days a week. What is that, 72 hours?
Okay. So, is this basically the standard in AI companies in Silicon Valley?
This kind of grind mindset. - Yeah, I mean, maybe not exactly like that,
but I think there is a trend towards it. And it's interesting. I think it
almost flipped because when I was in in academia, I felt like that. As
a professor, you write grants, you teach, and you do research.
It's like three jobs in one, and it's more than a full-time
job if you want to be successful. successful. And I feel like
now, like Nathan just said, the professors, in comparison
to a lab, I think they have less pressure or workload than
at a frontier lab because— - I think they work a lot. They're just
so fulfilled. By working with students— and having a constant runway of
mentorship and a mission that is very people-oriented, I think in a
era when things are moving very fast and are very chaotic, it's
very rewarding to people. - Yeah, and I think at a startup,
it's this pressure. It's like you have to make it. And it's really
important that people put in the time, but it is really hard because you
have to deliver constantly, and I've been at a startup. I had a good
time, but I don't know if I could do it forever. It's an interesting pace and it's exactly like we talked about in the
beginning. These models are leapfrogging each other, and they are just
constantly trying to take the next step compared to their competitors.
It's just ruthless right now. - I think this leapfrogging nature and
having multiple players is actually an underrated driver of language modeling
progress where competition is so deeply ingrained in people, and these companies have intentionally created
very strong cultures. Like, Anthropic is known to be so culturally, like, deeply committed and organized. I mean,
we hear so little from them, and everybody at Anthropic seems very
aligned. And it's like being in a culture that is super tight and having this competitive
dynamic is a thing that's gonna make you work hard and create
things that are better. But that comes at the cost of
human capital, which is like you can only do this for so long, and
people are definitely burning out. I wrote a post on burnout
as I've tread in and out of this myself, especially trying to
be a manager, full-mode training. It's a crazy job doing this. The
book Apple in China by Patrick McGee, he talked about how hard the Apple
engineers worked to set up the supply chains in China, and he was like, they
had "saving marriage" programs, and he told in a podcast, he
was like, "People died from this level of working
hard." So I think it's just like it's a perfect environment for
creating progress based on human expense, and there's
gonna be a lot of... the human expense is the 996 that we
started this with, which is like— ... people do really grind. - I also read this book. I think they had a
code word for if someone had to go home to spend time with their family to save
the marriage, and it's crazy. Then the colleagues said, "Okay, this is like red
alert for this situation. We have to let that person go home this weekend."
But at the same time, I don't think they were forced to work. They were so
passionate about the product, I guess, that you get into that mindset. And
I had that sometimes as an academic, but also as an independent
person, I have that sometimes. I overwork, and it's unhealthy. I had back
issues, I had neck issues, because I did not take the breaks that I maybe
should have taken. But no one forced me to; it's because I wanted to
work, because it's exciting stuff. - That's what OpenAI and Anthropic are
like. They want to do this work. - Yeah, but there's also a
feeling of fervor that's building, especially in Silicon Valley,
aligned with the scaling laws idea, where there's this hype where the world
will be transformed in a scale of weeks and you want to be at the
center of it. And then, you know, I have this great fortune of having conversations with a wide
variety of human beings, and from there I get to see all these
bubbles and echo chambers across the world. It's fascinating to see how
we humans form them. And I think it's fair to say that Silicon Valley is a
kind of echo chamber, a kind of silo and bubble. I think bubbles are
actually really useful and effective. It's not necessarily a negative
thing because you could be ultra-productive. It could be the Steve Jobs reality distortion field, because
you just convince each other that breakthroughs are imminent, and
by convincing each other of that, you make the breakthroughs imminent. - Byrne Hobart wrote a book classifying
bubbles. One of them is financial bubbles, which is like speculation, which is bad,
and the other one is for build-outs, because it pushes people to build
these things. And I do think AI is in this, but I worry about it transitioning
to a financial bubble, which is - Yeah, but also in the space of ideas, that bubble—you are doing a reality distortion field, and that means you are
deviating from reality. And if you go too far from reality while
also working, you know, 996, you might miss some fundamental
aspects of the human experience, including beyond Silicon Valley. This
is a common problem in Silicon Valley: it's a very specific geographic
area. You might not understand the Midwest perspective, the full experience of all the other humans in
the United States and across the world, and you speak a certain way to each other,
you convince each other of a certain thing, and that can get you
into real trouble. Whether AI is a big success and becomes
a powerful technology or it's not, in either trajectory
you can get yourself into trouble. So you have to consider
all of that. Here you are, a young person trying to decide what
you want to do with your life. - The thing that is... I don't even
really understand this, but the SF AI memes have gotten to the point
where "permanent underclass" was one of them, which was the idea
that the last six months of 2025 was the only time to
build durable value in an AI startup or model. Otherwise, all
the value will be captured by existing companies and you will
therefore be poor, which... that's an example of the SF
thing that goes so far. I still think for young people going to be
able to tap into it, if you're really passionate about wanting to have an
impact in AI, being physically in SF is the most likely place where
you're going to do this. But it has has trade-offs. - I think SF is an incredible
place, but there is a bit of a bubble. And if you go into
that bubble, which is extremely valuable, just get out also. Read history books, read literature, visit
other places in the world. Twitter and Substack are
not the entire world. - I would say, one of the people I worked
with is moving to SF, and it's like, I need to get him a copy of Season of the
Witch, which is a history of SF from 1960 to 1985, which goes through
the hippie revolution, like all the gays taking over the city and that
culture emerging, and then the HIV/AIDS crisis and other things. And
it's just like, that is so recent, and so much turmoil and hurt,
but also love in SF. And it's like, no one knows about this. It's a
great book, Season of the Witch. I recommend it. A bunch of my SF friends who get out recommended it to me. And
I think that's just like living there... I lived there and I didn't
appreciate this context, and it's just so recent. - Yeah. Okay, let's... We talked a lot
about a lot of things. Certainly about the things that were exciting
last year. But this year, One of the things you guys mentioned
that's exciting is the scaling of text diffusion models, and just a different
exploration of text diffusion. Can you talk about what that is and what
the possibility it holds? So, different kinds of
approaches than the current LMs? - Yeah, so we talked a lot about the transformer
architecture and the autoregressive transformer architecture specifically,
like GPT. And it doesn't mean no one else is working on anything else.
So, people are always on the, let's say, lookout for the next big
thing. Because I think it would be almost stupid not to. Because sure,
right now, the transformer architecture is the thing, and it works
best, and there's, right now, nothing else out there. But, you know, it's always a
good idea to not put all your eggs into one basket. So, people are developing
other alternatives to the autoregressive transformer. One of
them would be, for example, text diffusion models. And listeners may
know diffusion models from image generation, like Stable Diffusion
popularized it. There was a paper on generating images. Back then, people
used GANs, Generative Adversarial Networks. And then there was this
diffusion process where you iteratively denoise an image, and that resulted
in really good quality images over time. Stable Diffusion was a company. Other
companies build their own diffusion models. And then people are now like, "Okay,
can we try this also for text?" Doesn't, you know, make intuitive sense
yet, because it feels like, okay, it's not something continuous like a pixel that we can
differentiate. It's discrete text, so how do we implement that denoising process? It's
kind of similar to the BERT models by Google. Like, when you go back to the original
transformer, they were the encoder and the decoder. The decoder is what we
are using right now in GPT and so forth. The encoder is more like a parallel technique where you
have multiple tokens that you fill in in parallel. GPT models,
they do autoregressive generation, completing the sentence one
token at a time. And in BERT models, you have a
sentence that has gaps. You mask them out, and then
one iteration is filling in these gaps. Text diffusion is
kind of like that, where you are starting with some random
text, and then you are filling in the missing parts or refining
them iteratively over multiple iterations. And the cool thing here
is that this can do multiple tokens at the
same time. It's like the promise of having it more efficient.
Now, the trade-off is, of course, how good is the quality? It
might be faster, and now you have this dimension of the denoising process.
The more steps you do, the better the text becomes. And people... I mean, you can scale in different
ways. They try to see if that is maybe a valid alternative to
the autoregressive model in terms of giving you the same
quality for less compute. Right now, there are papers that
suggest if you want to get the same quality, you have to crank up
the denoising steps, and then you end up spending the same compute you
would spend on an autoregressive model. The other downside is, while
being parallel sounds appealing, some tasks are not parallel. Like
reasoning tasks or tool use, maybe where you have to ask a
code interpreter to give you an intermediate result. That is tricky
with diffusion models. So, there are some hybrids, but the main idea is: how
can we parallelize it? It's an interesting avenue. I think
right now, there are mostly research models out there, like
LaMDA and some other ones. I saw some by startups, some
deployed models. There is no big diffusion model at scale yet,
like on the Gemini or ChatGPT level. But there was an announcement by Google, a site where they said they are
launching Gemini Diffusion, and they put it into context of their Gemini Nano 2 model, and they said basically:
for the same quality on most benchmarks, we can generate
things much faster. You mentioned what's next. I don't think the
text diffusion model is going to replace autoregressive LLMs, but it
will be something maybe for quick, cheap, at-scale
tasks. Maybe the free tier in the future will
be something like that. - I think there are examples where it's already
being used. To paint an example of why this is better, for example, when
GPT-5 is taking 30 minutes to respond, it's generating one token at
a time. And this diffusion idea is essentially to generate all of
those tokens and the completion in one batch, which is why it could be
way faster. And I think it could be suited for... the startups I'm hearing
about are code startups where you have a code base, and you have somebody that's
effectively "vibe coding," and they say, "Make this change." And a
code diff is essentially a huge reply from the model, but
it doesn't have to have that much external context, and you can get it
really fast by using these diffusion models. One example I've heard is that they
use text diffusion to generate really long diffs, because doing it
with an autoregressive model would take minutes, and that time for a user-facing
product causes a lot of churn. Every second, you lose a lot of users.
So, I think it's going to be this thing where it's going to— ...grow and have some applications, but I
actually thought that different types of models were going to be used for different
things much sooner than they have been, so I kind of trade off. I think the
tool-use point is the one that's stopping them from being most general purpose
because, for Claude Code and ChatGPT search, the autoregressive chain is interrupted
with some external tool, and I don't know how to do that
with the diffusion setup. - So what's the future of tool use this
year and then in the coming years? Do you think there's going to be a lot of developments
there, and how that's integrated into the entire stack? - I do think right now, it's mostly
on the proprietary LLM side, but I think we will see more of that
in the open-source tooling. And I think it is a huge unlock
because then you can really outsource certain tasks from
just memorization to actual— you know, instead of having the
LLM memorize what is 23 plus 5, just use a calculator. - So do you think that can
help solve hallucination? - Not solve it, but reduce it.
So the LLM still needs to know when to ask for a tool call. And the second one is, well, it doesn't mean the
internet is always correct. You can do a web search, but let's say I
asked who won the World Cup in, let's say, 1998; it still needs to
find the right website and get the right information. You can still go to the
incorrect website and give me incorrect information. So I don't think it
will fully solve that, but it is improving it in that sense. And so another cool paper
earlier this year—I think it was December 31st, so it's
not technically 2026, but close—the recursive language model. That's a cool idea to kind of
take this even a bit further. Just to explain, Nathan,
you also mentioned earlier, it's harder to do cool research in academia
because of the compute budget. If I recall correctly, they did everything with
GPT-5, so they didn't even use local models, but the idea is, let's say you have a
long-context task; instead of having the LLM solve all of it in one
shot or even in a chain, you break it down into sub-tasks.
You have the LLM decide what is a good sub-task, and then recursively call an LLM to solve
that. And I think something like that, adding tools—you know,
each one maybe you have a huge Q&A task, so each one
goes to the web and gathers information, and then you pull it together
at the end and stitch it back together. I think there's going to be a lot of
unlock using things like that where you don't necessarily improve the LLM
itself; you improve how the LLM is used and what the LLM can use. One
downside right now with tool use is you have to give the LLM
permission to use tools. And that will take some trust, especially
if you want to unlock things like having an LLM answer emails for
you—or not even answer, but just sort them for you or select them for you or
something like that. I don't know if I would today give an LLM access to my emails,
right? I mean, this is a huge risk. - I think there's a cool... one last point
on the tool use thing. I think that you hinted at this, and we've both come at
this in our own ways, is that the open versus closed models use tools in very different
ways, where open models, people go to Hugging Face and download the model, and then the
person's going to be like, "What tool do I want?" I don't know, Exa is my preferred search
provider, but somebody else might care for a different search startup. Where you release
a model, it needs to be useful for multiple tools, for multiple use cases, which
is really hard because you're making a general reasoning engine model, which
is actually what gpt-oss-120b is good for. But on the closed
models, you're deeply integrating the specific tool into your experience,
and I think that open models will struggle to replicate some of the
things that I like to do with closed models, which will be like, you can
reference a mix of public and private information. And something that I keep
trying every three to six months, I try Claude Code on the web,
which is just prompting a model to make an update to some GitHub repository
that I have. And it's just like that set of secure cloud
environments is just so nice for just sending it off to do this
thing and then come back to me, and these will probably help define
some of the local open and closed niches. But I think initially, because
there was such a rush to get tool use working, the open models were on the back foot,
which is kind of inevitable. I think there's so much research, so many resources in
these frontier labs, but it will be fun when the open models solve this
because it's going to necessitate a bit more flexible and potentially interesting
model that might work with this recursive idea to be an orchestrator
and a tool use model, so hopefully the necessity drives
some interesting innovation there. - So, continual learning—this
is a longstanding topic, important problem. I think
that increases in importance as the cost of training the models
goes up. So can you explain what continual learning is and how important
it might be this year and in the coming years to make progress? - This relates a lot to this kind
of SF zeitgeist of, what is AGI, which is Artificial General
Intelligence, and what is ASI, Artificial Superintelligence, and
what are the language models that we have today capable of doing? I think
the language models can solve a lot of tasks, but a key milestone
among the AI community is essentially when AI could
replace any remote worker, taking in information and solving
digital tasks and doing them. And the limitation that's
highlighted by people is that a language model will not learn
from feedback the same way that an employee does. So if you hire an
editor, the editor will mess up, but you will tell them. And if you hired a good editor,
they don't do it again. But language models don't have this ability to modify themselves and learn very
quickly. So the idea is, if we are going to actually get to something that
is a true, general adaptable intelligence that can go into any remote
work scenario, it needs to be able to learn quickly from feedback
and on-the-job learning. I'm personally more bullish on language
models being able to just provide them with very good context.
You said, maybe offline, that you can write extensive documents
to models where you say, "I have all this information. Here are
all the blog posts I've ever written. I like this type of writing. My voice is
based on this." But many people don't provide this to models, and the models
weren't designed to take this amount of context previously. Agentic
models are just starting. So it's this kind of trade-off: do we need
to update the weights of this model with this continual learning thing
to make them learn fast? Or the counterargument is we just need to provide
them with more context and information, and they will have the appearance of learning
fast by having a lot of context and being smart. - So we should mention the terminology
here. Continual learning refers to changing the weights continuously so
that the model adapts and adjusts based on the new incoming information, doing so continually,
rapidly, and frequently. And then the thing you mentioned
on the other side of it generally will be referred to
as in-context learning. As you learn stuff, there's a
huge context window. You can just keep loading it with extra information
every time you prompt the system, which I think both legitimately
can be seen as learning. It's just a different place
where you're doing the learning. - I think, to be honest with you,
continual learning — updating weights — we already have that in
different flavors. If you think about how... I think the
distinction here is: do you do that on a personalized custom
model for each person, or do you do it on a global model
scale? I think we have that already, going from GPT-5 to 5.1 and 5.2. It's maybe not immediate, but it is a
curated update, a quick curated update where there was feedback about things
they couldn't do, feedback by the community. They updated the weights,
next model, and so forth. So it is a flavor of that. Another even
finer-grained example is like RLVR; you run it, it
updates. The problem is you can't just do that for each person because
it would be too expensive to update the weights for each person, and I think
that's the problem. Unless you get... Even at OpenAI scale, building
the data centers, it would be too expensive. I think that is only
feasible once you have something on the device where the cost is on the
consumer. Like what Apple tried to do with the Apple Foundation models, putting them
on the phone, where they learn from experience. - A bit of a related topic, but this kind
of, maybe anthropomorphized term: memory. What are different ideas for the mechanism of
how to add memory to these systems as we're increasingly seeing?
Personalized memory especially? - Right now, it's mostly basically stuffing things into the context
and then just recalling that. But again, I think it's expensive because
you have to—you can cache it, but still you spend tokens on that. And the
second one is you can only do so much. I think it's more like a preference
or style. I mean, a lot of people do that when they solve math
problems. You say it's way so you can add previous knowledge and stuff,
but you also give it certain preference prompts: "do what I preferred last
time," or something like that. But it doesn't unlock new capabilities. So
for that, one thing people still use is LoRA adapters. These are basically,
instead of updating the whole weight matrix, there are two smaller weight
matrices that you kind of have in parallel or overlays like
the delta. But yeah, you can do that to some extent, but then again, it is economics. There
were also papers, for example, LoRA learns
less but forgets less. It's like, there's no free lunch. If you
want to learn more, you need to use more weights, but it gets more expensive. And
then again, if you learn more, you forget more, and you have to find that
Goldilocks zone basically. - We haven't really mentioned it much,
but implied in this discussion is context length also. Is there a lot
of innovation that's possible there? - I think the colloquially accepted
thing is that it's a compute and data problem where you can...
and sometimes small architecture things like attention
variants. We talked about hybrid attention models, which
is essentially if you have what looks like a state space model within
your transformer. And those are better suited because you have to
spend less compute to model the furthest along token. I think that, those aren't free because they have to
be accompanied by a lot of compute or the right data. How many sequences
of 100,000 tokens do you have in the world, and where do you get
these? It just ends up being pretty expensive to scale them. We've gotten
pretty quickly to a million tokens of input context length. I would
expect it to keep increasing and get to 2 million or 5 million this year,
but I don't expect it to go to 100 million. That would be like a true
breakthrough, and I think those breakthroughs are possible. I think of the continual
learning thing as a research problem where there could be a breakthrough that
just makes transformers work way better at this and it's cheap. These things
could happen with so much scientific attention. But turning the crank, it'll
be consistent increases over time. - Looking at the extremes, I think there's,
again, no free lunch. So, the one extreme to make it cheap: you have, let's
say, an RNN that has a single state where you save everything from
the previous stuff. It's like a specific fixed-size thing,
so you never really grow the memory because you are stuffing
everything into one state, but then the longer the context gets, the
more information you forget because you can't compress everything
into one state. Then on the other hand, you have the transformers, which
try to remember every token, which is great sometimes if you want to look up specific
information, but very expensive because you have the KV cache that grows, the
dot product that grows. But then, like you said, the Mamba layers—I
mean, they kind of have the same problem. Like an RNN, you try to compress everything
into one state; you're a bit more selective there. But then I think it's like
this Goldilocks zone again. With Nemotron 3, they found a good
ratio of how many attention layers do you need for the global
information where everything is accessible compared to having these compressed
states. And I think that's how we will scale more—by finding better, let's say, ratios in the
Goldilocks zone, like between making computing cheap enough
to run, but then also making it powerful enough to be
useful. And one more plug here, the Recursive Language Model
paper, that is one of the papers that tries to kind of address the
long context thing. So what they found is essentially instead of stuffing
everything into this long context if you break it up into
multiple smaller tasks, so you save memory by having multiple
smaller cores, you can actually get better accuracy than having the
LLM try everything all at once. I mean, it's a new paradigm. We will see,
you know, there might be other flavors of that. So I think with that, we
will still make improvement on long context, but then also, like
Nathan said, I think the problem is for pre-training itself, we don't have as
many long context documents as other documents. So it's harder
to study basically how LLMs behave and stuff
like that on that level. - There are some rules of thumb where essentially
you pre-train a language model, like OLMo. we pre-trained at like 8K context
length and then extended to 32K with training. And there are some rules
of thumb where you're essentially doubling the training context length, it takes
like 2X compute, and then you can normally like 2 to 4X the
context length again. So I think a lot of it ends up being
kind of compute bound at pre-training, which is in this... Like we talked about,
everyone talks about this big increase in compute for the top labs this year, and
that should reflect in some longer context windows. But I think on the post-training side,
there are some more interesting things. As we have agents, the agents are gonna manage
this context on their own, where now agents, people that use Claude Code a lot dread
the compaction, which is when Claude takes its entire full 100,000 tokens of work
and compacts it into a bulleted list. But what the next
models will do—and I'm sure people are already working on this—is
essentially the model can control when it compacts and how. So you can essentially
train your RL algorithm where compaction is an action- ...where it shortens the history and
then the problem formulation will be, "I want to keep the maximum evaluation
scores that I have gotten while the model compacts its history to
the minimum length." Because then you have the minimum amount of tokens that
you need to do this kind of compounding autoregressive prediction. So there are actually
pretty nice problem setups in this, where the... Like these agentic models
learn to use their context in a different way than just plow forward. - One interesting recent example
would be DeepSeek-V3.2, where they had a sparse attention
mechanism where they have essentially a very efficient,
small, lightweight indexer. And instead of attending to all tokens, it
selects: "What tokens do I actually need?" I mean, it almost comes back
to the original idea of attention where you are selective, but
attention is always on, you have maybe zero weight on some of them, but you use them all. But
they are even more like, "Let's just mask that out or not even do that." And even with sliding window attention
in OLMo, that is also kind of that idea. You have a rolling window where you keep it
fixed, because you don't need everything. Occasionally, some layers you might, but
it's wasteful. But right now, I think, if you use everything, you're on the safe
side—it gives you the best bang for the buck because you never miss information.
And I think this year will be more about figuring out, like you
said, how to be smarter about that. Right now, people want to have
the next state-of-the-art, and the state-of-the-art happens to
be the brute-force, expensive thing. And then once you have
that, as you said, keep that accuracy, but let's see how we can
do that cheaper now, with tricks. - Yeah. All this scaling thing. The reason we get the Claude
4.5 Sonnet model first is because you can train it faster and you're
not hitting these compute walls as soon. They can just try a lot more things and get
the model faster, even though the bigger model is actually better. - I think we should say that there's a lot of
exciting stuff going on in the AI space. My mind has recently
been really focused on robotics. Today, we almost
entirely didn't talk about robotics. There's a lot
of stuff on image generation, video generation. I think it's fair to say that the most exciting
research work in terms of the amount, intensity, and fervor is in the LLM space, which is why I think it's
justified for us to focus on the LLMs that we're discussing.
But it'd be nice to bring in certain things that might be
useful. For example, world models— there's growing excitement on that.
Do you think there will be any use in this coming year for
world models in the LLM space? Yes, I do think so. Also with LLMs, what's interesting here is
that if we unlock more LLM capabilities, it also automatically
unlocks all the other fields because it makes progress faster. A lot of
researchers and engineers use LLMs for coding. So even if they work on
robotics, if you optimize these LLMs that help with coding,
it pays off. But then, yes, world models are interesting.
It's basically where you have the model run a simulation
of the world in a sense, like a little toy thing of the real
thing, which can, again, unlock capabilities
regarding data the LLM is not aware of. It can simulate things.
And I think LLMs happen to work well by pre-training and
doing next-token prediction. But we could do this even
more sophisticatedly in a sense. I think there was a paper by Meta, a paper called World
Models. So where they basically apply the concept of
world models to LLMs again, where instead of just having
next-token prediction and verifiable rewards, checking the answer
correctness, they also make sure the intermediate variables are correct.
You know, it's kind of like the model is learning basically a
code environment in a sense. And I think this makes a lot of sense.
It's just expensive to do, but it is making things more
sophisticated, like modeling the whole thing, not just
the result. And so it can add more value. I remember when I
was a grad student, there is a... competition called CASP, I
think, where they do protein structure prediction. They predict
the structure of a protein that is not solved yet
at that point. So in a sense, this is actually great, and I think
we need something like that for LLMs also, where you do the benchmark, but no one
does. You hand in the results, but no one knows the solution. And then after
the fact, someone reveals that. But, AlphaFold, when it came
out, it crushed this benchmark. I mean, there
were also multiple iterations, but I remember the
first one. I'm not an expert in that subject, but the first one
explicitly modeled the physical interactions of the... You know,
the physics of the molecule. Also the angles, impossible angles. And then
in the next version, I think they got rid of this, and just with brute force, scaling
it up. And I think with LLMs, we are currently in this brute force scaling because
it just happens to work. But I do think at some point it might make
sense to bring back this thing. And I think with world
models, I think that is where I think that might be
actually quite cool. I mean, yeah. And of course, also for robotics,
which is completely unrelated to LLMs. - Yeah. And robotics is very explicit.
So there's the problem of locomotion or manipulation. Locomotion is much more solved, especially
in the learning domain. But there's a lot of value, just like with the
initial protein folding systems, bringing in the traditional model-based
methods. So you don't... it's unlikely that you can just learn the
manipulation or the whole body, local manipulation problem end to end. That's the dream. But then you realize when
you look at the magic of the human hand and the complexity of the real world,
it's really hard to learn this all the way through, the way I
guess AlphaFold 2 didn't. - I'm excited about the robotic learning
space. I think it's collectively getting supercharged by all the
excitement and investment in language models generally, where
the infrastructure for training transformers, which is a general
modeling thing, is becoming world-class industrial tooling, where wherever there was a limitation
for robotics, it's just way better. There's way more compute. And then on top
of that, they take these language models as kind of central units where you can
do interesting explorative work around something that already
works. And then I see it emerging as, kind of like we talked
about, Hugging Face transformers and Hugging Face. I think when I was at Hugging Face, I was
trying to get this to happen, but it was too early. It's like these open
robotic models on Hugging Face, and having people be able to
contribute data and fine-tune them. I think we're much closer now that the
investment in robotics and self-driving cars is related and it enables this,
where once you get to the point where you can have this sort of ecosystem where
somebody can download a robotics model and maybe fine-tune it to their robot
or share datasets across the world. There's some work in this
area like RTX, I think it was a few years ago, where people are starting to
do that. But once they have this ecosystem, it'll look very different.
And then this whole post-ChatGPT boom is putting more
resources into that, which I think is a very good area for doing research. - This is also resulting in much
better, more accurate, and more realistic simulators being built, closing
the sim-to-real gap in the robotic space. But, you know, you mentioned
a lot of excitement in the robotics space and a lot of
investment. The downside of that, which happens in
hype cycles, I personally believe, and most robotics
people believe, that it's not... Robotics is not going to be solved at the time scale as being
implicitly or explicitly promised. And so what happens when
there's all these robotics companies that spring up and then they don't have
a product that works? Then there's going to be this kind of
crash of excitement, which is nerve-wracking. Hopefully something
else will come in and keep swooping in so that the continued development
of some of these ideas keeps going. - I think it's also related to the continual
learning issue, essentially, where the real world is so complex. With LLMs, you don't really need to have
something learn for the user, because there are a lot of things
everyone has to do. Everyone maybe wants to, I don't know, fix their
grammar in their email or code or something like that. It's more constrained,
so you can kind of prepare the model for that. But preparing the robot for the
real world is harder. I mean, you have the robotic foundation
models, and you can learn certain things like grasping
things. But then again, everyone's house is different.
It's so different, and that is, I think, where the robot would have
to learn on the job, essentially. And that, I guess, is the
bottleneck right now: how to, customize it on the fly, essentially. - I don't think I can
possibly understate the importance of the thing that doesn't
get talked about almost at all by robotics folks or
anyone, which is safety. All the interesting complexities we talk
about learning, all the failure modes and failure cases, everything we've been talking
about with LLMs—sometimes they fail in interesting ways. All of that is
fun and games in the LLM space. In the robotic space, in people's homes,
across millions of minutes and billions of interactions, you really
are almost allowed to fail never. When you have
embodied systems that are put out there in the real world,
you just have to solve so many problems you never thought you'd have to
solve when just thinking about the general robot learning problem. - I'm so bearish on in-home learned robots for consumer purchase. I'm very
bullish on self-driving cars, and I'm very bullish for robotic automation,
e.g., like Amazon distribution where Amazon has built whole new
distribution centers designed for robots first rather than humans. There's a
lot of excitement in AI circles about AI enabling automation and mass-scale manufacturing, and I do think that
the path to robots doing that is more reasonable, where it's a thing that is designed and optimized to do a
repetitive task that a human could conceivably do but doesn't
want to. And then I'm much, but it's also going to take
a lot longer than people probably predict. I think the leap from AI singularity to we can now scale
up mass manufacturing in the US because we have a massive
AI advantage is one that is troubled by a lot of political
and other challenging problems. - Let's talk about timelines,
specifically timelines to AGI or ASI. Is it fair, as a starting point,
to say that nobody really agrees on the definitions of AGI and ASI? - I kind of think there's a
lot of disagreement, but I've been getting pushback where a lot of people
kind of say the same thing, which is like a thing that could reproduce
most digital economic work. So, the remote worker
is a fairly reasonable example. And I think OpenAI's
definition is somewhat related to that, which is like
an AI that can do a lot of economically valuable tasks—which I don't
really love as a definition, but I think it could be a grounding point, because language models today,
while immensely powerful, are not this remote worker
drop-in. And there are things that could be done by an AI that
are way harder than remote work, which are like finding an unexpected scientific discovery that you couldn't even posit,
which would be an example of something that somebody says is an artificial
superintelligence problem. Or, taking in all medical records and
finding linkages across certain illnesses that people didn't know, or
figuring out that some common drug can treat some niche cancer. They would
say that that is a superintelligence thing. So these are kind of natural
tiers. My problem with it is that it becomes deeply entwined with the quest
for meaning of AI and these religious aspects to it. So there's
different paths you can take it. - And I don't even know if the
remote worker is a good definition because what exactly is
that? I actually, I mean, I like... I don't know if you
like the originally titled AI27 report. They focus more on code and
research taste, so the target there is the superhuman coder. So they have
several milestone systems: Superhuman coders,
superhuman AI researcher, then superintelligent AI
researcher, and then the full ASI, artificial superintelligence. But after you develop the superhuman coder,
everything else follows quickly. There, the task is to have fully
autonomous, automated coding. So any kind of coding you need
to do in order to perform research is fully
automated. And from there, humans would be doing AI research
together with that system, and they will quickly be able to develop a system that
can actually do the research for you. That's the idea. And initially their
prediction was 2027, 2028, and now they've pushed it back by three to four years to 2031 (mean prediction).
Probably my prediction is even beyond 2031, but at least you can, in a concrete way, think about how difficult
it is to fully automate programming. - Yeah, I disagree with some of their
presumptions and dynamics on how it would play out, but I think
they did good work in the scenario-defining milestones that are
concrete and tell a useful story, which is why the reach for this AI 2027 document transcended Silicon Valley. It's
because they told a good story and they did a lot of rigorous work to do this. I think the camp that I fall
into is that AI is so-called "jagged," which will be excellent at some
things and really bad at some things. I think that when they're close to this automated software engineer, what it will
be good at is traditional ML systems and frontend, the model is
excellent at; but distributed ML, the models are actually quite bad at
because there's so little training data on doing large-scale distributed learning.
This is something we already see, and I think this will just get amplified.
And then it's kind of messier in these trade-offs, like how you think
AI research works and so on. - So you think basically a superhuman
coder is almost unachievable, because of the jagged nature of the
thing, you're just always going to have gaps in capabilities? - I think it's assigning completeness to
something where the models are already superhuman at some types of code.
I think that will continue. And people are creative, so they'll
utilize these incredible abilities to fill in the weaknesses of the models
and move really fast. There'll always be this dance for a long
time between the humans enabling the thing that the model
can't do. And the best AI researchers are the ones that can
enable this superpower. And I think those lines lead to what we already
see. I think like Claude Code for building a website, you can stand up a beautiful
website in a few hours or do data going to keep getting better, and
we'll pick up some new coding skills along the way. Linking to
what's happening in big tech, this AI 2027 report leans into the singularity idea, whereas
I think research is messy, social and largely in the data
in ways that AI models can't process. But what we do have today
is really powerful and these tech companies are all collectively buying
into this with tens of billions of dollars of investment. So we are going to
get some much better version of ChatGPT, a much better version of
Claude Code than we already have. I think it's just hard to predict
where that is going, but the bright clarity of that future is why some of
the most powerful people in the world are putting so much money into this.
And I think it's just kind of small differences between like—we don't
actually know what a better version of ChatGPT is, but also, can it automate AI
research? I would say probably not, at least in this timeframe. Big tech
is going to spend $100 billion much faster than we get an automated AI researcher
that enables an AI research singularity. - So you think your prediction
would be— if this is even a useful milestone or
more than 10 years out? - I would say less than that on the software
side, but I think longer than that on things like research. - Well, let's just for fun try to imagine
a world where all software writing is fully automated. Can
you imagine that world? - By the end of this year, the amount of
software that'll be automated will be so high. But it'll be things like
trying to train a model with RL and you need to have
multiple bunches of GPUs communicating with each other. That'll
still be hard, but it'll be much easier. - One way to think about this—
the full automation of programming—is just thinking of lines
of useful code written, the fraction of that to the number of humans in the
loop. So presumably there'll be for a long time humans in the loop of
software writing. It'll just be fewer and fewer relative to the amount
of code written. Right? And the superhuman coder—I think
the presumption there is it goes to zero, the number of humans
in the loop. What does that world look like when the number of
humans in the loop is in the hundreds, not in the
hundreds of thousands? - I think software engineering will
be driven more to system design and goals of outcomes, where I do
think software is largely going to be. I think this has been happening
over the last few weeks, where people have gone from a month ago saying, "Oh
yeah, agents are kind of slop," which is a famous Karpathy quote, to
what is a little bit of a meme—the industrialization of software when anyone
can just create software with their fingerprints. I do think we are closer
to that side of things, and it takes direction and understanding
how systems work to extract the best from the language
models. I think it's hard to accept the gravity of how much is going to change
with software development and how many more people can do things without
ever looking at the code. - I think what's interesting is to think
about whether these systems will be independent—completely independent in
the sense that, while I have no doubt that LLMs will kind of at some
point solve coding in a sense, like calculators solve calculating,
right? So at some point, humans developed a tool where you never need
a human to calculate that number. You just type it in, and it's
an algorithm. You can do it in that sense. And I think that's
the same probably for coding. But the question isn't... I think what will happen
is, you will just say, "Build that website." It will make a really good website, and
then you maybe refine it. But will it do things independently where... Will
you still be having humans asking the AI to do something? Like will
there be a person to say, "Build that website?" Or will there be AI that
just builds websites or something? - I think talking about
building websites is— - Too simple. - The problem with websites and
the problem with the web, you know, HTML and all that kind of stuff,
it's very resilient to just ... slop. It will show you slop; it's good
at showing slop. I would rather think of safety-critical systems,
like asking AI to end-to-end generate something that manages
logistics, or manages cars, a fleet of cars—all that kind of stuff.
So it end-to-end generates that for you. - I think a more intermediate example is
take something like Slack or Microsoft Word. I think if organizations
allow it, AI could very easily implement features end-to-end and
do a fairly good job for like things that you want to try.
You want to add a new tab in Slack that you want to use, and I think
AI will be able to do that pretty well. - Actually, that's a really great
example. How far away are we from that? - Like this year. - See, I don't know. I don't know. - I guess I don't know how bad production
codebases are, but I think that within... on the order of a few years, a
lot of people are going to be pushed to be more of a designer and product
manager, where you have multiple of these agents that can try things for you and they
might take one to two days to implement a feature or attempt to fix a bug.
And you have these dashboards, which I think Slack is actually a good dashboard
where your agents will talk to you and you'll then give feedback.
But things like, if I make a website, like, "Do you
want a passable logo?" I think these cohesive design things and the
style is going to be very hard for models and deciding on
what to add the next time. - I just... Okay. I hang out with a
lot of programmers and some of them are a little bit on the skeptical side
in general. That's just their vibe. I just think there's a lot of complexity
involved in adding features to complex systems. Like, if you look
at the browser, Chrome. If I wanted to add a feature,
if I wanted to have tabs as opposed to up top, I
want them on the left side. Interface-wise, right? I think we're
not... This is not a next-year thing. - One of the Claude releases this year, one
of their tests was: we give it a piece of software and leave Claude to run to
recreate it entirely, and it could already almost rebuild Slack from
scratch, just given the parameters of the software and left
in a sandbox environment to do that. - So the "from scratch" part,
I like almost better. - So it might be that smaller and newer
companies are advantaged, and they're like, "We don't have the bloat and complexity,
and therefore this feature exists." - And I think this gets to the point you
mentioned, that some people you talk to are skeptical. I think that's
not because the LLM can't do X, Y, Z. It's because people
don't want it to do it this way. - Some of that could be a skill issue
on the human side. We have to be honest with ourselves. And some of that
could be an underspecification issue. So, programming, it's like you're
just assuming... This is like an issue with communication in relationships
and friendships. You're assuming the LLM is supposed to read your mind.
This is where spec-driven design is really important. Using natural
language to specify what you want. - If you talk to people at the labs,
they use these in their training and production code. Claude Code is
built with Claude Code, and they all use these things extensively. Dario
talks about how much of Claude's code... It's like these people are slightly
ahead in terms of the capabilities they have and what they
probably spend on inference. They could spend 10 to 100x as
much as we're spending on a lowly $100 or $200 a month plan. They
truly let it rip. And I think that, with the pace of progress
that we have, it seems like- a year ago we didn't have Claude Code
and we didn't really have reasoning models. The difference between sitting
here today and what we can do with these models is significant,
and there's a lot of low-hanging fruit to improve them. The
failure modes are pretty dumb. Like- "Claude, you tried to use a CLI command I
don't have installed 14 times, and then I sent you the command to run."
That, from a modeling perspective, is pretty fixable. So I don't know. - I agree with you. I've been
becoming more and more bullish in general. Speaking to what you're
articulating, I think it is a human skill issue.
Anthropic is leading the way, along with other
companies, in understanding how to best use the models for programming;
therefore, they're effectively using them. There are a lot of
programmers on the outskirts who don't... I mean, there's not a really good guide on how to use them. People
are trying to figure it out, but- - It might be very expensive. The
entry point might be $2,000 a month, which is only for tech companies
and rich people. That could be it. - But it might be worth it. If
the final result is a working software system, it might be worth it. By
the way, it's funny how we converged from the discussion of timeline to AGI
to something more pragmatic and useful. Is there anything
concrete, interesting, useful, and profound to be said
about the timeline to AGI and ASI? Or are these discussions a bit
too detached from the day to day? - There are interesting bets. A lot
of people are trying to do RLVR— Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable
Rewards—in real scientific domains, where startups with hundreds of millions
of funding have wet labs where they're having language models propose
hypotheses that are tested in the real world. I would say that they're early,
but with the pace of progress, it's like- ...maybe they're early by six months
and they make it because they were there first, or maybe they're
early by eight years; you don't know. That type of moonshot to branch
this momentum into other sciences would be very transformative. If, AlphaFold moments happen in all
sorts of other scientific domains by a startup solving this. I think
there are startups—maybe Harmonic is one—where they're going all in
on language models plus Lean for math. You had another guest where
you talked about this recently, and we don't know exactly
what's going to fall out of spending $100 million on that
model. Most of them will fail, but a couple might be big
breakthroughs that are very different than ChatGPT or
Claude Code type software experiences. A tool that's only good for a PhD mathematician but makes
them 100X effective... - I agree. I think this will happen
in a lot of domains, especially domains that have a lot of resources, like finance, legal, and
pharmaceutical companies. But then again, is it really
AGI? Because we are now specializing it again. Is it really
that much different from back in the day when we had specialized
algorithms? It's just the same thing, way more sophisticated, but I don't know, is there a threshold for AGI? I think
the real cool thing here is that we have foundation models we
can specialize. That's like the breakthrough. Right now, I think we
are not there yet because, first, it's too expensive, but also, ChatGPT doesn't just give away their
model to customize it. I think once that's true... And I can
imagine this as a business model, where OpenAI says at some point, "Hey, Bank of America, for $100
million we will do your custom model," something like that. I think
that will be the huge economic value-add. The other thing, though, is also... Companies, I mean,
what is the differentiating factor? If everyone uses the
same LLM, if everyone uses ChatGPT, they will all do
the same thing. Well, if everyone is moving in lockstep,
but companies want to have a competitive advantage, there is
no way around using some of their private data and specializing.
It's gonna be interesting. - Seeing the pace of progress, it does
feel like things are coming. I don't think the AGI and ASI thresholds
are particularly useful. - I think the real question, and
this relates to the remote worker thing, is: when are we going to see a
big, obvious leap in economic impact? Because currently there's
not been an obvious leap in the economic impact of
LLM models, for example. And that's, you know, aside
from AGI or ASI, all that stuff, there's a real question of, "When
are we going to see a GDP..." "...jump?" - Yeah, what is the GDP made up
of? A lot of it is financial services, so I don't know what this is. - Right, GDP is a- - It's just hard for me to
think about the GDP bump, but I would say that software development
becomes valuable in a different way, when you no longer have
to look at the code anymore. When Claude Code will make
you a small business. Which is essentially, Claude can set up your
website, your bank account, your email, and your whatever else. And you just have
to express what you're trying to put into the world. That's not just an enterprise market, but it is hard. I don't
know how you get people to try doing that. I guess if ChatGPT can do
it—people are trying ChatGPT. - I think it boils down to the scientific
question of, "How hard is tool use to solve?" Because a lot of
the stuff you're implying, the remote work stuff, is tool
use. It's like... computer use, like how you have an
LLM that goes out there, this agentic system, and does
something in the world, and only screws up 1% of the time. - Computer use- - Or less. - ...is a good example of what labs care about
and we haven't seen a lot of progress on. We saw multiple demos in 2025 of, like, Claude can use your computer, or OpenAI
had operator, and they all suck. They're investing money in this,
and I think that'll be a good example. Whereas actually,
something where it just seems like taking over the whole
screen seems a lot harder than having an API that they
can call in the back end. For some of that, you have to set up a different
environment for them all to work in. They're not working on your MacBook; they
are individually interfacing with Google and Amazon and Slack, and they
handle all these things in a very different way than humans do. So some
of this might be structural blockers. - Also, specification-wise,
I think the problem is for arbitrary tasks, well, you
still have to specify what you want your LLM to do. And how
do you do that? What is the environment? How do you specify? You
can say what the end goal is, but if it can't solve the end goal...
with LLMs, if you ask it for text, it can always clarify or do
sub-steps. How do you put that information into a system that, let's say,
books a travel trip for you? You can say, "You screwed up my credit card information,"
but even to get it to that point, even to get it to that point,
how do you, as a user, guide the model before it can even attempt that?
I think the interface is really hard. - Yeah, it has to learn a lot
about you specifically. And this goes to continual learning,
about the general mistakes that are made throughout, and then
mistakes that are made through you. - All the AI interfaces are getting
set up to ask humans for input. I think Claude Code we talked about a lot. It asks feedback and questions. If
it doesn't have enough specification on your plan or your desired goal, it starts
to ask questions, "Would you rather?" We talked about Memory,
which saves across chats. Its first implementation is kind
of odd, where it'll mention my dog's name or something in a chat. I'm like, "You don't need to be
subtle about this. I don't care." But things that are emerging,
ChatGPT has the Pulse feature. Which is like a curated
couple of paragraphs with links to something to look at,
and people talk about how models are going to ask you
questions. Which I think is a very... It's probably going to
work. The language model knows you had a doctor appointment and asks,
"Hey, how are you feeling after that?" Which again goes into the territory
where humans are very susceptible to this, and there's a lot of
social change to come. But also, they're experimenting with having the
models engage. Some people like this Pulse feature, which processes your
chats and automatically searches for information and puts it in the app.
So there are a lot of things coming. - I used that feature before, and I
always feel bad because it does that every day, and I rarely check
it out. It's like, how much compute is burned on something I don't even look
at, you know? It's kind of like, "Oh..." - There's also a lot of idle compute
in the world, so don't feel too bad. - Okay. Do you think new
ideas might be needed? Is it possible that the path to
AGI, however we define that, to solve computer use more generally,
to solve biology and chemistry and physics—sort of the Dario Amodei
definition of AGI? Do you think it's possible that totally new ideas
are needed? Non-LLM, non-RL ideas? What might they look like? We're
going into philosophy land a bit. - For something like a singularity
to happen, I would say yes. The new ideas could be architectures
or training algorithms, fundamental deep learning
things. But in that nature, they're pretty hard to predict.
I think we won't get very far even without those advances.
We might get the software solution, but it might stop at
software and not do computer use without more innovation. So I think
that a lot of progress will be coming, but if you're gonna zoom
out, there's still ideas in the next 30 years that are
gonna look like that was a major scientific innovation
that enabled the next chapter of this. And I don't know
if it comes in one year or in 15 years. - Yeah. I wonder if the bitter lesson holds
true for the next 100 years, what that looks like. - If scaling laws are fundamental in deep
learning, I think the bitter lesson will always apply, which is
compute will become more abundant, but even within
abundant compute, the ones that have a steeper scaling
law slope or a better offset— like, this is a 2D plot of
performance and compute—and like even if there's more compute available,
the ones that get 100x out of it will win. - It might be something like literally
computer clusters orbiting Earth with solar panels. - The problem with that is heat dissipation.
You get all the radiation from the sun and don't have any air to dissipate heat.
But there is a lot of space to put clusters. There's a lot of solar energy there and
you could figure out the heat dissipation, as there is a lot of energy and there
probably could be engineering will to solve the heat problem— so there could be. - Is it possible—and we should say
that it definitely is possible— that we're basically going to be
plateauing this year? Not in terms of— the system capabilities, but
what they actually mean for human civilization. So on the coding
front, really nice websites will be built. Very nice auto-complete. Very nice way to understand code bases
and maybe help debug, but really just a very nice helper on the coding
front. It can help research mathematicians do some
math. It can help you with shopping. It's a nice
helper. It's Clippy on steroids. What else? It may be a good
education tool and all that kind of stuff, but computer use turns out
extremely difficult to solve. So I'm trying to frame the cynical case in all these domains
where there's not a really huge economic impact, but realize
how costly it is to train these systems at every level, both the
pre-training and the inference, how costly the inference is,
the reasoning, all of that. Like, is that possible? And how
likely is that, do you think? - When you look at the models, there are
so many obvious things to improve and it takes a long time to train
these models and to do this art, and it'll take us with the ideas
that we have multiple years to actually saturate in terms
of whatever benchmark or performance we are searching
for. It might serve very narrow niches; like the average
ChatGPT 800 million user might not get a lot of benefit out of this,
but it is going to serve different populations by getting
better at different things. - But I think what everybody's
chasing now is a general system that's useful
to everybody. So, okay, so if that's not... That can plateau, right? - I think that dream is actually kind of
dying. As you talked about with the specialized models where it's like... And multimodal is often... Video generation
is a totally different thing. Thing. - "That dream is kind of
dying" is a big statement, because I don't know if it's dying.
If you ask the actual frontier lab people, they... I mean,
they're still chasing it, right? - I do think they are still rushing
to get the next model out, which will be much better than the...
"Much" is a relative term, but it will be better than the previous one.
And I can't see them slowing down. I just think the gains
will be made or felt more through not only scaling the model, but now... I feel like there's a lot of tech
debt. It's like, "Well, let's just put the better model in there." Better model, better model. And now
people are like, "Okay, let's also at the same time improve
everything around it too." Like the engineering of the
context and inference scaling. The big labs will still keep
doing that. And now also the smaller labs will catch up,
because now they are hiring more. There will be more people and
LLMs. It's kind of like a circle. They also make them more productive and
it's just... It's like amplification. I think what we can expect is
amplification, but not like a change of any... not like a paradigm change.
I don't think that is true, but everything will be just amplified
and amplified, and I can see that continuing for a long time, you know? - Yeah. I guess my statement that the
dream is dying depends on exactly what you think it's gonna be doing.
Like, Claude Code is a general model that can do a lot of things,
but it's not necessarily... It depends a lot on integrations. I bet
Claude Code could do a fairly good job of doing your email, and the hardest part
is figuring out how to give information to it and how to get it to
be able to send your emails. But that's just kind of like... I
think it goes back to what is the "one model to rule everything" ethos,
which is just like a thing in the cloud that handles your entire digital
life and is way smarter than everybody. It's like it's operating in a... So it's an interesting leap of faith
to go from "Claude Code becomes that," which in some ways is... There are some
avenues for that, but I do think that the rhetoric of the industry
is a little bit different. - I think the immediate thing
we will feel next as a normal person using LLMs will probably
be related to something trivial, like making figures.
Right now, LLMs are terrible at making figures. Is it because we
are getting served the cheap models with much less inference compute
than behind the scenes? Maybe some. Like, there are some ways to get
better figures, but if you ask today, ..."Draw a flowchart of X, Y, Z,"
it's most of the time terrible. And it is a very simple task for
a human. I think it's almost easier sometimes to draw something
than to write something. - Yeah, the multimodal understanding does
feel like something that is odd... ...that it's not better solved. - I think we're not saying one obvious
thing that we're not realizing, that's a gigantic thing that's hard
to measure, which is making all of human knowledge accessible—
—to the entire world. One thing that is hard to articulate
is the huge difference between Google Search and an LLM. I
feel like I can basically ask an LLM anything and get an answer, and
it's doing less and less hallucination. And that means understanding my own life, figuring out a career trajectory,
solving the problems all around me, learning about anything
through human history. I feel like nobody's
really talking about that, because they just immediately take
it for granted that this is awesome. That's why everybody's using it:
because you get answers for stuff. Think about the impact across time. This is not just in the United
States; it's all across the world. Kids throughout the world being
able to learn these ideas— the impact that has across time is
probably... ...That's the real impact. Talk about GDP; it won't be
like a leap. It'll be... ...that's how we get to Mars,
that's how we build these things, that's how we have a million new OpenAIs
and all the innovation from there. It's this quiet force that permeates
everything: human knowledge. - I agree with you. In a sense, it
makes knowledge more accessible, but it also depends on what the topic is. For something like math, you can
ask it questions and it answers, but if you want to learn a topic from
scratch, the sweet spot is still elsewhere. There are really good math
textbooks laid out linearly, and that is a proven
strategy to learn a topic. It makes sense, if you start from zero, to use information-dense
text to soak it up, but then you use the LLM to
make infinite exercises. Like, you have problems in a certain area
or have questions that something's- uncertain about certain
things, you ask it to generate example problems, you solve them, and you need more background
knowledge, you ask it to generate that. But then... it won't
give you anything, let's say, that is not in the textbook.
It's just packaging it differently, if that makes sense. But then there are things I feel
like where it also adds value in a more timely sense, where there is no good alternative besides a human doing
it on the fly. For example, if you're planning to go to
Disneyland and you try to figure out which tickets to
buy for which park when, well, there is no textbook on that. There
is no information-dense resource. There's only the sparse internet, and
then there is a lot of value in the LLM. You just ask it. You have
constraints on traveling these days. I want to go there and there. Please
figure out what I need, when and from where, what it costs and
stuff like that, and it is a very customized, on-the-fly package. And this is like one of a thousand
examples of personalized- Personalization is essentially pulling
information from the sparse internet, the non-information-dense thing where there's no better version that exists.
It just doesn't exist. You make it almost from scratch. - And if it does exist, it's full of-
speaking of Disney World, full of- what would you call it? Ad slop. It's
impossible. Take any city in the world, what are the top 10 things to do?
An LLM is just way better to ask than anything on the internet. - Well, for now, that's because they're
subsidized and they're gonna be paid for by ads. - Oh my goodness. - It's coming. - No. No. I mean, I'm hoping there's a
very clear indication what's an ad and what's not an ad in that context. - That's something I mentioned a
few years ago. If, I don't know, if you are looking for a new
running shoe, well, is it a coincidence that Nike maybe comes
up first? Maybe, maybe not. But I think there are clear laws.
You have to be clear about that. I think that's what everyone fears.
It's the subtle message in there, but that also brings us
to the topic of ads, where I think this was a
thing. Hopefully, I think for- in 2025, just because I think it's they're still not making money
in other ways right now. Having ad spots in there... but
the thing is, they couldn't, because there are alternatives without
ads and people would just flock- to the other products.
It's also just crazy how- yeah, how they're one-upping
each other, spending so much money to just get the users. - I think so. Like, some Instagram
ads— I don't use Instagram, but I understand the appeal of paying
a platform to find users who will genuinely like your product, and that is
the best case of things like Instagram ads. But there are also plenty of cases
where advertising is very awful for incentives, and I think that a world where the power of AI can integrate with that
positive view of, "I am a person and I have a small business and I
want to make the best, I don't know, damn steak knives in the world,
and I want to sell them to somebody who needs them." And if AI can make
that sort of advertising thing work even better, that's very good
for the world, especially with digital infrastructure, because
that's how the modern web has been built. But that's not to say that addicting feeds so that you
can show people more content is a good thing. So, I think that's even
what OpenAI would say, is they want to find a way that can make
the monetization upside of ads while still giving their users agency. And I personally would think that Google is
probably going to be better at figuring out how to do this, because
they already have ad supply and if they figure out how to turn
this demand in their Gemini app into useful ads, then they can turn it on. And somebody will figure it out—I don't know
if it's this year, but there will be experiments with it. - I do think what holds companies back
right now is really just that the competition is not doing it. It's
more like a reputation thing. It's just, I think people are just
afraid right now of ruining or losing their reputation, losing users, because it would make headlines if
someone launched these ads. But— - Unless they were great, but the first ads
won't be great because it's a hard problem that we don't know how to solve. - Yeah, I think also the first version of
that will likely be something like on X, like the timeline where you have a
promoted post sometimes in between. It'll be something where it will say "promoted"
or something small, and then there will be an image. I think right now the problem
is: who makes the first move? - If we go 10 years out, the
proposition for ads is that you will make so much money on
ads by having so many users that you can use this to fund better R&D
and make better models, which is why YouTube is dominating the market for any— Netflix is scared of
YouTube. They have the ads, they make—I pay $28 a month for
Premium. They make at least $28 a month off of me and many other people.
And they're just creating such a dominant position in video. So
I think that's the proposition: that ads can make you have
a sustained advantage. in what you're spending per
user. But there's so much money in it right now that
somebody starting that flywheel is scary because it's a long-term bet. - Do you think there'll be some
crazy big moves this year business-wise? Like Google or Apple
acquiring Anthropic or something like this? - Dario will never sell, but we are
starting to see some types of consolidation with Groq for $20 billion and Scale AI for almost
$30 billion and countless other deals like this that are
structured in a way that is detrimental to the Silicon
Valley ecosystem, which is this licensing deal where not
everybody gets brought along, rather than a full acquisition that
benefits the rank-and-file employee by getting their stock vested.
That's a big issue for culture to address because the startup
ecosystem is the lifeblood where, if you join a startup, even if it's not
successful, it might get acquired on a cheap premium and you'll get
paid out for this equity. These licensing deals are taking
the top talent a lot of the time. The deal for Groq to
NVIDIA is rumored to be better to the employees, but it is
still this antitrust-avoiding thing. But I think that this trend of
consolidation will continue. Me and many smart people I
respect have been expecting consolidation to have
happened sooner, but it seems like some of these things
are starting to turn, but at the same time, companies are
raising ridiculous amounts of money for reasons where I'm like, "I don't
know why you're taking that money." So it's mixed this year, but some
consolidation pressure is starting. - What kind of surprising consolidation
will we see? You say Anthropic is a "never." I mean, Groq is a big
one. Groq with a Q, by the way. - Yeah. There's just a lot of startups
and a very high premium on AI startups. So there could be a lot of - that kind of stuff, yeah. - $10 billion range acquisitions, which
is really big for a startup that was maybe founded a year ago. I think Manus.ai... this company based in
Singapore that Meta-founded was founded eight months ago and then had
a $2 billion exit. I think there will be some other multi-billion dollar
acquisitions, like Perplexity. - Like Perplexity, right? - Yeah, people rumor them to
Apple. I think there's a lot of of pressure and liquidity
in AI. There's pressure on big companies to have outcomes and- I would guess that a big
acquisition gives people leeway to then tell the next
chapter of that story. - I guess Cursor—we've been talking
about code—somebody acquires Cursor. if somebody acquires Cursor... - They're in such a good position
by having so much user data. And we talked about continual learning. They
had one of the most interesting sentences in a blog post, which is that they had
their new Composer model, which was a fine-tune of one of these large Mixture
of Expert models from China. You can know that by asking it or because the
model sometimes responds in Chinese— ...which none of the American models do. And
they had a blog post where they're like, "We're updating the model weights every
90 minutes based on real-world feedback from people using it." Which is like
the closest thing to real-world RL happening on a model, and it's just
mentioned in one of their blog posts— - That's incredible. - which is super cool. - And by the way, I should say I use Composer
a lot because one of the benefits it has is that it's fast. - I need to try it 'cause
everybody says this. - And there'll be some IPOs potentially.
You think Anthropic, OpenAI, xAI. - They can all raise so much money so easily that they don't feel a need to.
So long as fundraising is easy, they're not going to IPO because public
markets apply pressure. I think we're seeing in China that the
ecosystem's a little different with both MiniMax and Z.ai applying for, filing IPO paperwork, which will be interesting
to see how the Chinese market reacts. I actually would guess that it's
going to be similarly hypey to the US, so long as all this is going and
not based on the reality that they're both losing a ton of money. I wish
more of the gigantic American AI startups were public because it would be very
interesting to see how they're spending money and have more insight. And
also just to give people access to investing in these, because
I think they're some of the most formidable companies—they're the companies of the era. And the
tradition is now for so many of the big startups in the US to not go public.
It's like we're still waiting for Stripe and the IPO, but Databricks definitely
didn't. They raised like a Series G or something. And I just feel
like it's kind of a weird equilibrium for the
market where it's like, I would like to see these
companies go public and evolve in that way that a company can. - Do you think 10 years from now some
of the frontier model companies are still around? Anthropic, OpenAI? - I definitely don't see it as a
winner-takes-all unless there truly is some algorithmic secret that
one of them finds that lets this flywheel. Because the development path
is so similar for all of them. Google and OpenAI have all the same
products, and then Anthropic's more focused, but when you talk to people it
sounds like they're solving a lot of the same problems. So I think... and there's
offerings that'll spread out. There's a lot of... it's a very big cake being made that
people are going to take money out of. - I don't want to trivialize it, but OpenAI
and Anthropic are primarily LLM service providers. And some of the
other companies like Google and xAI, linked to X, do other stuff too. And so it's very possible,
if AI becomes more commodified, that the companies just
providing LLMs will die. - I think the advantage they have is a
lot of users, and I think they will just pivot. Like Anthropic, I
think, pivoted. I don't think they originally planned to work on
code, but they found, "Okay, this is a nice niche, and now we are comfortable
and we push on this niche." I can see the same thing... Let's say
hypothetically, I'm not sure if it will be true, but let's say Google
takes all the market share of the general chatbot. Maybe OpenAI will then
focus on some other sub-topic. They have too many users to go
away in the foreseeable future. - I think Google is always ready to
say, "Hold my beer," with AI models. - I think the question is if
the companies can support the valuations. I see the AI companies being looked at in some ways like
AWS, Azure, and GCP are, all competing in the same space and all
very successful businesses. There's a chance that the API market is
so unprofitable that they go up and down the stack to products and hardware.
They have so much cash that they can build power plants and data centers, which is
a durable advantage now. But there's also a reasonable outcome that
these APIs are so valuable and so flexible for developers that
they become something like AWS. But AWS and Azure are also
going to have these APIs, so having five or six people competing in the
API market is hard. So maybe that's why they get squeezed out. - You mentioned "RIP Llama." Is
there a path to winning for Meta? - I think nobody knows. They're moving a
lot, so they're signing licensing deals with Black Forest Labs, which
is an image generation company, or Midjourney. So I think in some ways on the product and consumer-facing
AI front, it's too early to tell. I think they have
some people who are excellent and very motivated being close to
Zuckerberg. So I think there's still a story to unfold there. Llama is a
bit different, where Llama was the most focused expression of the
organization. And I don't see Llama being supported to that extent.
I think it was a very successful brand for them. So they still
might participate in the open ecosystem or continue the
Llama brand into a different service, because people
know what Llama is. - You think there's a Llama 5? - Not an open-weight one. - It's interesting. I think Llama was the
pioneering open-weight model. With Llama 1, 2, and 3, there was a lot
of love. But I think then, hypothesizing or speculating,
I think the leaders at Meta, like the upper executives,
they... I think they got very excited about Llama because they saw how
popular it was in the community. And then I think the problem was trying to,
let's say, monetize the open—or not monetize the open source,
but use it to make a bigger splash. It felt almost forced, like
developing these very big Llama 4 models to be on top of the benchmarks. But I don't think the
goal of Llama models is to be on top of the benchmarks beating, let's say, ChatGPT
or other models. I think the goal was to have a model that people can use,
trust, modify, and understand. So that includes having smaller models.
They don't have to be the best models. And what happened was, these models
were, of course... the benchmarks suggested that they were better than
they were because they had specific models trained on preferences so that they
performed well on benchmarks. That's kind of, like, this overfitting thing to force
it to be the best. But then at the same time, they didn't do the small models
that people could use. And I think that no one could run these big models
then. And then there was kind of a weird thing. I think it's just
because people got too excited about headlines pushing the
frontier. I think that's it. - And too much on the benchmarking side. - It's too much work. - I think it imploded under internal political fighting and misaligned
incentives. The researchers want to build the best models, but
there's a layer of organization— ...and management that is trying to demonstrate
that they do these things. And then there are rumors about how, for example,
some horrible technical decision was made. It just seems like it got so bad
that it all just crashed out. - Yeah, but we should also
give huge props to Mark Zuckerberg. I think it comes
from Mark, actually, from Mark Zuckerberg, from the top of the
leadership, saying open source is important. The fact that
that leadership exists means there could be a Llama 5,
where they learn the lessons from benchmarking and say, "We're
going to be GPT-OSS—" "...and provide a really awesome
library of open source." - What people say is that there's
a debate between Mark and Alexandr Wang, who is very bright,
but much more against open source. And to the extent that he has
a lot of influence over the AI org, it seems much less likely, because it
seems like Mark brought him in for a fresh leadership eye in directing AI. And if being open or closed is no longer
the defining nature of the model, I don't expect that to be a defining
argument between Mark and Alex. They're both very bright,
but I just have a hard time understanding all of it because
Mark wrote this piece in July of 2024, which was probably the best blog post at the time, saying
"The Case for Open Source AI." And then July 2025 came around and it was,
"We're reevaluating our relationship with open source." So it's just kind of... - But I think also the problem...
Not the problem, but I think, well, we may have been a bit too
harsh, and that caused some of that. Because I mean, we as open source
developers or the community... Even though the model was
maybe not what everyone hoped for, it got a lot of backlash.
And I think that was unfortunate because I can see that as a
company, they were hoping for positive headlines. And
instead of just getting no headlines or positive headlines,
in turn they got negative headlines. And then it kind of
reflected bad on the company. I think that is also something
where it's maybe a spite reaction, almost like, "Okay, we tried to
do something nice, we tried to give you something cool, like an
open source model, and now you are kind of being negative about
us, even for the company." So in that sense, it looks like, "Well,
maybe then we'll change our mind." I guess. I don't know. - Yeah, that's where the
dynamics of discourse on X can lead us, as a community, astray. Because sometimes it feels random. People
pick the thing they like and don't like. I mean, you can see the same thing
with Grok 4.1 and Grok Code Fast 1.0. I don't think, vibe-wise, people love it
publicly. But a lot of people use it. So if you look to Reddit and
X, they don't really give it praise from the programming
community, but they use it. And the same thing with probably Llama.
I don't understand the dynamics of either positive hype or negative
hype. I don't understand it. - I mean, one of the stories of 2025
is the US filling the gap of Llama, which is the rise of these Chinese
open-weight models, models- to the point where that was the single
issue I've spent a lot of energy on lately, trying to do policy work to
get the US to invest in this. - So just tell me the story of ADAM. - The ADAM Project started as me
calling it the American DeepSeek Project, which doesn't really work for
DC audiences, but it's the story of the most impactful thing I can
do with my career, which is that these Chinese open-weight models
are cultivating a lot of power, and there is a lot of demand for
building on these open models, especially in enterprises in the US that
are very cagey about Chinese models. - The ADAM Project, American Truly Open Models, is a US-based initiative
to build and host high-quality, genuinely open-weight AI models
and supporting infrastructure explicitly aimed at competing
with and catching up to China's rapidly advancing
open-source AI ecosystem. - I think the one-sentence summary
would be that... or two sentences. One is a proposition that open models
are going to be an engine for AI research because that is what people
start with; therefore, it's important to own them. And the second
one is, therefore, the US should be building the best models so
that the best research happens in the US, and those US companies
take the value from being the home of where AI research is
happening. And without more investment in open models—we have plots
on the website where it's like, "Qwen, Qwen, Qwen, Qwen"—it's
all these models that are excellent from these Chinese companies
that are cultivating influence internationally. I think the US is spending way more on AI, and the
ability to create open models that are a generation beyond what
the cutting edge of closed labs costs roughly $100 million,
which is a lot of money, but not a lot of money to these
companies. Therefore, we need a centralizing force of people who
want to do this. And I think we got engagement from people pretty
much across the full stack, whether it's policy. - So there has been support
from the administration? - I don't think anyone
technically in government has signed it publicly, but I know
people that have worked in AI policy, in both the Biden and Trump
administrations, are very supportive of promoting open-source models
in the US. I think, for example, AI2 got a grant from the NSF
for $100 million over four years, which is the biggest CS grant the NSF has ever awarded, and it's for AI2
to attempt this. It's a starting point. But the best thing happens when there are
multiple organizations building models, because they can cross-pollinate
ideas and build this ecosystem. I don't think it works if it's
just Llama releasing models, because Llama could go away.
The same thing applies for AI2; I can't be the only one building models.
It becomes a lot of time spent on talking to people, whether in
policy... I know NVIDIA is very excited about this. I think Jensen
Huang has been talking about the urgency for this, and they've done a
lot more in 2025, where the Nemotron models are more of a focus.
They've started releasing some data along with NVIDIA's
open models, and very few companies do this, especially
of NVIDIA's size, so there are signs of progress. We hear about
Reflection AI, where they say their two billion dollar fundraise is dedicated
to building US open models, and I feel and their announcement tweet
reads like a blog post, right? I think that cultural tide is
starting to turn. In July, four or five DeepSeek-caliber
Chinese open-weight models and and zero from the US. That's
the moment where I realized, like, "Oh, I guess I have to spend energy on
this because nobody else is gonna do it." So it takes a lot of people contributing
together, and I don't say that, the Adam Project isn't the thing that's
helping to move the ecosystem, but it's people like me doing this sort
of thing to get the word out. - Do you like the 2025 America's
AI Action Plan? That includes open source stuff. The
White House AI Action Plan includes a dedicated section titled "Encourage
Open-Source and Open-Weight AI," defining such models and
arguing they have unique value for innovation and startups. - Yeah. I mean, the AI
Action Plan is a plan, but largely, I think it's maybe the most coherent policy document that has come
out of the administration, and I hope that it largely succeeds. I know people
that have worked on the AI Action Plan and the challenges of taking policy and
making it real. I have no idea how to do this as an AI researcher,
but largely a lot of things in that were very real, and there's
a huge build-out of AI in the country. There are a lot of issues that
people are hearing about, from water use to whatever, and we should be able to
build things in this country, but also, we need to not ruin places in
our country in the process of building it, and it's worthwhile
to spend energy on. I think that's a role the federal
government plays. They set the agenda. And with AI, setting the agenda
that open-weight should be a first consideration is a large part of what they can do and then
people think about it. - Also, for education and talent
for these companies, it's very important because otherwise,
if there are only closed models, how do you get
the next generation of people contributing at some point?
Because otherwise, you will point only be able to learn after you joined a company. But at
that point, how do you hire talented people? How do you identify
talented people? I think open source is essential for a lot of
things, but also even just for educating the population and
training the next generation of researchers. It's the
way, or the only way. - The way that I could've gotten this
to go more viral was to tell a story of Chinese AI integrating
with an authoritarian state, being ASI and taking over the world, and therefore
we need our own American models. But it's very intentional why I talk about
innovation and science in the US because I think it's both more
realistic as an outcome, but also it's a world that I
would like to manifest. - I would say, though, also
even any open-weight model, I do think, is a valuable model. - Yeah. And my argument is that we should be
in a leading position. But I think it's worth saying it simply because there
are still voices in the AI ecosystem that say we should consider banning the
release of open models due to safety risks. And I think it's worth adding
that, effectively, that's impossible without making the US have
its own great firewall, which is also known to not work that well because the cost for training these models, whether
it's one to a hundred million dollars, is attainable to a huge amount of people in the world that want to have influence, so
these models will be trained all over the world. And we want the models,
especially when, like, I mean, there are safety concerns, but we
want this information and tools to flow freely across the world and into the
US so that people can use them and learn from them. Stopping that would be
such a restructuring of our internet that it seems impossible. - Do you think maybe in that case the
big open-weight models from China are actually a good thing in a sense, like,
for the US companies? Because maybe the US companies you mentioned earlier
are usually one generation behind in terms of what they release open source
versus what they are using? For example, gpt-oss might not be the cutting-edge
model. Gemini 3 might not be, but they do that because they know this
is safe to release. But then when they see, these companies see, for
example, there is DeepSeek-V3.2, which is really awesome, and
it gets used and there is no backlash, there is no security risk, that
could then, again, encourage them to release better models. Maybe that, in
a sense, is a very positive thing. - A hundred percent. These Chinese companies
have set things into motion that I think would potentially not have happened
if they were not all releasing models. So I think it was like I'm almost sure
that those discussions have been had by leadership. - Is there a possible future where
the dominant AI models in the world are all open source? - Depends on the trajectory of progress that
you predict. If you think saturation in progress is coming within a
few years, so essentially, within the time where financial support
is still very good, then open models will be so optimized and so much cheaper
to run that they'll win out. This goes back to open source ideas
where so many more people will be putting money into optimizing
the serving of these open-weight common architectures
that they will become standards, and then you could have chips dedicated to
them, and it'll be way cheaper than the offerings from these closed
companies that are custom. - We should say that the AI27
report kinda predicts one of the things it does from a narrative
perspective is that there will be a lot of centralization. As the AI
systems get smarter and smarter, national security
concerns will arise, and you'll centralize the labs, and they'll
become super secretive, and there'll be this whole race - ...from a military perspective of how
do you... between China and the US. And so all of these fun
conversations we're having about LLMs... the generals and the soldiers will come into the room and be like, "All
right. We're now in the Manhattan Project stage of this whole thing." - I think in 2025, '26, '27, I don't think something like that is even remotely
possible. You can make the same argument for computers, right? You can say,
"Computers are capable and we don't want the general public to get them." Or chips,
even AI chips, but you see how Huawei makes chips now. It took
a few years, but... and I don't think there is a way you
can contain knowledge like that. I think in this day and age, it is impossible, like the internet. I
don't think this is a possibility. - On the Manhattan Project
thing, I think that a Manhattan Project-like thing for open
models would be pretty reasonable, because it wouldn't cost that much.
But I think that will come. It seems like culturally, the companies
are changing. But I agree with Sebastian on all of that. I don't see it
happening nor being helpful. - Yeah. The motivating force
behind the Manhattan Project was civilizational risk. It's harder to
motivate that for open-source models. - There's no civilizational risk. - On the hardware side,
we mentioned NVIDIA a bunch of times. Do you think Jensen
and NVIDIA will keep winning? - I think they have to iterate
and manufacture a lot. And I think they probably...
what they're doing, they do innovate, but I think there's always the chance that someone
does something fundamentally different, gets very lucky, and
then does something. But the problem is adoption. The moat of NVIDIA is probably not just the GPU. It's
more like the CUDA ecosystem, and that has evolved over two decades.
Even back when I was a grad student, I was in a lab
doing biophysical simulations, molecular dynamics, and we had a
Tesla GPU back then just for the computations. It was about
15 years ago now. And they built this up for a long time,
and that's the moat, I think. It's not the chip itself,
although they have the money to iterate, build, and
scale. But then it's really about compatibility. If you're
at that scale, why would you go with something risky where there are only a few chips
they can make per year? You go with the big one. But
then I do think with LLMs now, it will be easier to
design something like CUDA. It took 15 years because it was hard,
but now that we have LLMs, we can maybe replicate CUDA. - And I wonder if there will be a
separation of training and inference compute as we stabilize, and more
compute is needed for inference. - That's supposed to be the point of
the Groq acquisition. And that's why part of what Vera Rubin is- where they have a new chip with no
high-bandwidth memory, which is one of the- or very little, which is one of
the most expensive pieces. It's designed for pre-fill, which
is the part of inference where you essentially do a lot of matrix
multiplications. And then you only need the memory when you're doing this autoregressive
generation, and you have the KV cache swaps. So they have this new GPU
that's designed for that specific use case, and then the
cost of ownership per FLOP or whatever is actually way
lower. But I think that NVIDIA's fate lies in the diffusion
of AI still. Their biggest clients are still these hyperscale
companies. Like, Google obviously can make TPUs. Amazon is making Trainium. Microsoft will try to do its own things.
And so long as the pace of AI progress is high, NVIDIA's platform is the most
flexible and people will want that. But if there's stagnation, then creating bespoke
chips, there's more time to do it. - It's interesting that NVIDIA
is quite active in trying to develop all kinds of different products. - They try to create areas of commercial
value that will use a lot of GPUs. - Mm-hmm. But they keep innovating
and they're doing a lot of incredible research, so... - Everyone says the company's super
oriented around Jensen and how operationally plugged in he is. And
it sounds so unlike many other big companies that I've heard about. And so
long as that's the culture, I think that we can expect that to keep progress
happening. And it's like he's still in the Steve Jobs era of Apple.
So long as that is how it operates, I'm pretty optimistic for their situation because it's like, it is
their top-order problem, and I don't know if making these chips for the
whole ecosystem is the top goal of all these other companies. They'll do a good
job, but it might not be as good of a job. - Since you mentioned Jensen,
I've been reading a lot about history and about singular figures in
history. What do you guys think about the single man/woman view of
history? How important are individuals for steering the direction
of history in the tech sector? So, you know, what's NVIDIA
without Jensen? You mentioned Steve Jobs. What's Apple
without Steve Jobs? What's xAI without Elon or DeepMind without Demis? - People make things earlier and
faster, whereas scientifically, many great scientists credit being in the
right place at the right time and still making the innovation, where eventually
someone else will still have the idea. So I think that in that way, Jensen
is helping manifest this GPU revolution much faster and much more
focused than it would happen without having a person there. And this is
making the whole AI build-out faster. But I do still think that eventually,
something like ChatGPT would have happened and a build-out like this would have
happened, but it probably would not have been as fast. I think that's the
sort of flavor that is applied. - These individual people, there are people
who are placing bets on something. Some get lucky, some don't. But if you don't
have these people at the helm, it would be more diffused. It's almost like investing
in an ETF versus individual stocks. Individual stocks
might go up or down more heavily than an ETF, which is more balanced.
It will eventually go up over time. We'll get there. But it's just
like, you know, the focus I think is the thing. Passion and focus. - Isn't there a real case to be made
that without Jensen, there's not a reinvigoration of the
deep learning revolution? - It could've been 20 years
later, is what I would say. Or like another AI winter could
have come if GPUs weren't around. - That could change history completely
because you could think of all the other technologies that could've come in the meantime, and the
focus of human civilization would get... Silicon Valley would be
captured by different hype. - But I do think there's certainly
an aspect where it was all planned, the GPU trajectory. But on the
other hand, it's also a lot of lucky coincidences or good
intuition. Like the investment into, let's say, biophysical
simulations. I mean, I think it started with video games and then it just
happened to be good at linear algebra because video games require a lot of linear
algebra. And then you have the biophysical simulations. But still, I
don't think the master plan was AI. I think it happened to be Alex Krizhevsky. So someone took
these GPUs and said, "Hey, let's try to train a neural network on that."
It happened to work really well, and I think it only happened because
you could purchase those GPUs. - Gaming would've created a
demand for faster processors if NVIDIA had gone out of
business in the early days. That's what I would think. I think that the GPUs would've been different,
but I think GPUs would still exist at the time of AlexNet and at the time
of the Transformer. It was just hard to know if it would be one company
as successful or multiple smaller companies with worse chips.
But I don't think that's a 100-year delay. It might
be a decade delay. - Well, it could be one, two, three,
four, five-decade delay. I just can't see Intel or AMD doing what NVIDIA did. - I don't think it would be
a company that exists. I think it would be a different
company that would rise. - Like Silicon Graphics or something. - So yeah, some company that
has died would have done it. - But just looking at it,
it seems like these singular figures, these
leaders, have a huge impact on the trajectory of the world. Obviously,
there are incredible teams behind them. But, you know, having that kind of
very singular, almost dogmatic focus- -is necessary to make progress. - Yeah, I mean, even with GPT, it wouldn't
exist if there wasn't a person, Ilya, who pushed for this scaling, right? - Yeah, Dario Amodei was also
deeply involved in that. If you read some of the histories from
OpenAI, it seems wild thinking about how early these people were like, "We need
to hook up 10,000 GPUs and take all of OpenAI's compute and train one model."
There were a lot of people who didn't want to do that. - Which is an insane thing to
believe. To believe in scaling before scaling has any
indication that it's going to materialize. Again, singular figures.
Speaking of which, 100 years from now, this is presumably post-singularity,
whatever singularity is. When historians look back
at our time now, what technological breakthroughs
would they really emphasize as the breakthroughs
that led to the singularity? So far we have Turing to today, 80 years. - I think it would still be computing,
like the umbrella term "computing." I don't necessarily think that in 100 or 200 years it would be AI.
It could still very well be computers. We are now taking
better advantage of them, but the fact of computing remains. - It's basically a Moore's
Law discussion. Even the details of CUDA and GPUs
won't even be remembered, nor will all this software turmoil.
It'll just be, obviously, compute. - I generally agree, but is
the connectivity of the internet and compute able to be
merged? Or is it both of them? - I think the internet will probably
be related to communication. It could be a phone, the
internet, or satellites. Compute is more like the
scaling aspect of it. - It's possible that the internet
is completely forgotten- -that the internet is wrapped into phone
networks, like communication networks. This is just another manifestation
of that, and the real breakthrough comes from increased compute, or
Moore's Law, broadly defined. - Well, I think the connection of
people is very fundamental to it. it's like, you can talk to
anyone. You want to find the best person in the world for something, they are
somewhere in the world. And being able to have that flow of information—the
AIs will also rely on this. I've been fixating on when I
said the dream was dead about the one central model. The thing that is
evolving is people having many agents for different tasks. People already
started doing this with different clouds. It's described as many
AGIs in the data center where each one manages and they
talk to each other. And that is reliant on networking and the
free flow of information. on top of compute. But
networking, especially with GPUs, is such a part of
scaling of compute. The GPUs and the data centers
need to talk to each other. - Anything about neural networks will
be remembered? Like, do you think there's something very specific and
singular to the fact that it's neural networks that's seen as a breakthrough,
like a genius, that you're basically replicating, in a very
crude way, the human mind? The structure of the human
brain, the human mind? - I think without the human mind,
we probably wouldn't have neural networks, because it just was an
inspiration for that. But on the other end, I think it's just so,
so different. I mean, it's digital versus biological, that I do
think it will probably be more grouped as an algorithm. - That's massively parallelizable...
...On this particular kind of compute? - It could have been like genetic
computing; genetic algorithms just parallelized. It just happens that this
is more efficient and works better. - And it very well could be that the
LLM, the neural networks, the way we architect them now is just
a small component of the system that leads to singularity. - If you think of it in 100
years, I think society can be changed more with more compute
and intelligence because of autonomy. But looking
at this, what are the things from the Industrial Revolution that we
remember? We remember the engine, which is probably the equivalent
of the computer in this. But there's a lot of other physical
transformations that people are aware of, like the cotton gin and
all these things, these machines that are still known:
air conditioning, refrigerators. Some of these things from
AI will still be known. The word "transformer" could still
be known. I would guess that deep learning is definitely still known, but
the transformer might be evolved away from in 100 years with AGI researchers
everywhere. But I think deep learning is likely to be a
term that is remembered. - And I wonder what the air conditioning and
refrigeration of the future is that AI brings. If we travel forward 100 years from
now, we transport there right now, what do you think is different? How do
you think the world looks different? First of all, do you think there are
humans? Do you think there are robots everywhere walking around? - I do think specialized robots,
for sure, for certain tasks. - Humanoid form? - Maybe half-humanoid. We'll see. I think for certain things, yes, there
will be humanoid robots because it's just amenable for the environment.
But for certain tasks, it might make sense. What's harder
to imagine is how we interact with the devices and what humans
do with devices. Well, I mean, I'm pretty sure it will probably
not be the cellphone or the laptop. Will it be implants? - I mean, it has to be
brain-computer interfaces, right? I mean, 100 years from now, given
the progress we're seeing now— there has to be... unless
there's legitimately a complete alteration of how we
interact with reality. - On the other hand, cars are
older than 100 years, right? And it's still the same interface.
We haven't replaced cars with something else. We just made them
better, but it's still a steering wheel, still wheels, you know? - I think we'll still carry around
a physical brick of compute because people want some ability
to have a private... Like, you might not engage with it as much as a
phone, but having private information that is yours as an interface
between the rest of the internet, I think that will
still exist. It might not look like an iPhone and it might be
used a lot less, but I still expect people to carry things around. - Why do you think the smartphone
is the embodiment of private? There's a camera on it. There's— - Private for you, like encrypted
messages, encrypted photos... know what your life is. I guess it's a question of how optimistic
on brain-machine interfaces you are. Is all that just going to be stored
in the cloud? Your whole calendar? It's hard to think about processing all the information that
we can process visually through brain-machine interfaces
presenting something like a calendar or something to you. It's hard to just think about knowing,
without looking, your email inbox. Like you signal to a computer and
then you just know your email inbox. Is that something that the human
brain can handle being piped into it non-visually? I don't know
exactly how those transformations happen. Humans aren't changing in 100 years. I think agency and community are
things that people actually want. - A local community, yeah. - People you are close to, being
able to do things with them and being able to ascribe meaning to
your life and being able to do things. In 100 years, I don't think
that human biology is changing away from those on a
time scale that we can discuss. And I think that UBI
does not solve agency. I do expect mass wealth, and
I hope that it has spread so that the average life looks
very different in 100 years. But that's still a lot to happen.
If you think about countries that are early in their
development process to getting access to computing and internet, to
build all the infrastructure and have policy that shares one
nation's wealth with another is... I think it's
an optimistic view to see all that happening in 100 years- ...while they are still
independent entities and not just like absorbed into some
international order by force. - But there could be just better,
more elaborate, more effective ... social support systems
that help alleviate some levels of basic suffering
from the world. You know, the transformation of society where a lot
of jobs are lost in the short term, I think we have to really remember
that each individual job that's lost is a human being who's
suffering. That's like a ... When jobs are lost, the
scale is a real tragedy. You can make all kinds of arguments about
economics or how it's all going to be okay. It's good for the GDP,
there's going to be new jobs created. Fundamentally at the
individual level for that human being, that's real
suffering. That's a real personal sort of tragedy. And
we have to not forget that as the technologies are being
developed. And also my hope for all the AI slop we're seeing is that there will be a greater and
greater premium for the fundamental aspects of the human
experience that are in-person. The things that we all... Like seeing
each other, talking together in-person. - The next few years are definitely
going to be an increased value on physical goods and events— ...and
even more pressure on slop. So it'll be... the slop is only starting. The next few years will be more and
more diverse ...versions of slop. - They would be drowning
in slop. Is that what— - So I'm hoping that society
drowns in slop enough to snap out of it and be like, "We can't deal
with it. It just doesn't matter." And then, the physical has
such a higher premium on it. - Even like classic examples, I
honestly think this is true, and I think we will get tired of it.
We are already kind of tired of it. I mean, even art. I don't think art
will go away. You have paintings, physical paintings. There's
more value, not just monetary value, but just more
value appreciation for the actual painting than a photocopy of that
painting. It could be a perfect digital reprint, but there is something when you go to a
museum and you look at that art and you see the real thing and you just think,
"Okay. A human." It's like a craft. You have like an appreciation for that. And
I think the same is true for writing, for talking, for any type of experience... I do unfortunately think it
will be like a dichotomy, like a fork where some
things will be automated. Like, you know, there are not as many paintings
as there used to be, you know, 200 years ago. There are more photographs,
more photocopies. But at the same time, it won't go away.
There will be value in that. I think the difference will just be,
you know, what's the proportion of that. But personally, I have a hard time
reading things where I obviously see it's obviously AI generated.
I'm sorry. It might—it might be really good information there,
but I'm just like, "Nah, not for me." - I think eventually they'll fool
you, and it'll be on platforms that give ways of verifying or
building trust. So you will trust that Lex is not AI generated, having been
here. So then you have trust in this channel. But it's harder for new
people who don't have that trust. - Well, that will get interesting
because I think fundamentally it's a solvable problem by having trust in certain outlets that they won't do it,
but it's all going to be trust-based. There will be systems to authorize, "Okay, this
is real. This is not real." There will be some telltale signs where you can obviously
tell this is AI generated and this is not. But some will be so
good that it's hard to tell, and then you have to trust. And well, that will
get interesting and a bit problematic. - The extreme case of this is to
watermark all human content. So all photos that we take on our own
have some watermark until they are edited or something like this. And software
can manage communications with the device manufacturer- device
manufacturer to maintain human editing— which is the opposite of the discussion
to try to watermark AI images. And then you can make a Google image that has a watermark
and use a different Google tool to remove it. - Yep. It's going to be an
arms race, basically. - And we've been mostly focusing
on the positive aspects of AI. All the capabilities
that we've been talking about can be used to destabilize
human civilization with even just relatively dumb AI applied at scale,
and then further, superintelligent AI systems. Of course, there's
the sort of doomer take that's important to consider
as we develop these technologies. What gives you
hope about the future of human civilization, given everything we've been
talking about? Are we going to be okay? - I think we will. I'm
definitely a worrier, both about AI and non-AI things. But humans do
tend to find a way. I think that's what humans are built for: to have
community and find a way to figure out problems. That's what has gotten us
to this point. And to think that the AI opportunity and related
technologies is really big. And I think that there's big
social and political problems to help everybody understand that. And I
think that's what we're staring at a lot of right now, is like the world
is a scary place, and AI is a very uncertain thing. And it
takes a lot of work that is not necessarily building things.
It's like telling people and understanding people, that the
people building AI are historically not motivated or wanting to do. But it is something that is
probably doable. It just will take longer than people want.
And we have to go through that long period of like hard, distraught AI discussions if we want to
have the lasting benefits. - Yeah. Through that process, I'm
especially excited that we get a chance to better understand ourselves, us at the individual level as
humans and at the civilization level, and answer some of the
big mysteries, like what is this whole consciousness thing going on here? It seems to be truly special.
Like, there's a real miracle in our mind. And AI puts a mirror
to ourselves and we get to answer some of the big
questions about like, what is this whole thing going on here? - Well, one thing about that is also what
I do think makes us very different from AI and why I don't
worry about AI taking over is, like you said, consciousness. We
humans, we decide what we want to do. AI in its current
implementation, I can't see it changing. You have to tell
it what to do. And so you have still the agency. It doesn't
take the agency from you because it becomes a tool. You can think of
it as a tool. You tell it what to do. It will be more automatic
than other previous tools. It's certainly more powerful than a
hammer, it can figure things out, but it's still you in charge, right? So
the AI is not in charge, you're in charge. You tell the AI what to
do and it's doing it for you. - So in the post-singularity,
post-apocalyptic war between humans and machines, you're saying
humans are worth fighting for? - 100%. I mean, this is... The
movie Terminator, they made in the '80s, essentially,
and I do think, well, the only thing I can see
going wrong is, of course, if things are explicitly programmed to do
the thing that is harmful, basically. - I think actually in that, in a Terminator
type of setup, I think humans win. I think we're too clever. It's hard to
explain how we figure it out, but we do. And we'll probably be using local LLMs, open
source LLMs to help fight the machines. I apologize for the
ridiculousness. Like I said, Nathan already knows I've been a big
fan of his for a long time. Been a big fan of yours, Sebastian, for a long
time, so it's an honor to finally meet you. Thank you for everything you put out into the
world. Thank you for the excellent books you're writing. Thank you for teaching us. And
thank you for talking today. This was fun. - Thank you for inviting us here and having
this human connection, which is actually- - Extremely valuable- human connection. Thanks for listening to this conversation
with Sebastian Raschka and Nathan Lambert. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description, where you can also
find links to contact me, ask questions, give feedback
and so on. And now let me leave you with some
words from Albert Einstein. "It is not that I'm so
smart, but I stay with the questions much longer." Thank you for
listening, and hope to see you next time.


## Making Machine Learning more accessible | Sebastian Raschka, Lead AI Educator, Grid.ai

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tC2jzliedYQ

[Music] all right um so hello and welcome everyone to who's i was listening to this particular podcast for this podcast i have with us dr sebastian ruska he's the lead ai educator at grade ai and he is also the author of the book machine learning with pytorch and psychic learn and also few other books that cover the fundamentals of machine learning and deep learning techniques and implementing them with python he was also an assistant professor of statistics at university of wisconsin medicine and has been actively involved in making machine learning more accessible for beginners through his blogs video tutorials tweets and of course his books uh he also holds a doctorate in computational and quantitative biology from michigan state university so uh sebastian welcome to this podcast and it's so nice to finally talk to you yeah thanks so much for the kind invitation to be on your podcast jay i'm really excited um just the two things top of my head thanks so much for the kind introduction but yeah the only person really who calls me dr sebastian is actually my parents when they write me postcards and i think that's a joke when they address a postcard so yeah we can just go by sebastian i almost forget that uh yeah this is a thing like the phd is so long ago i um barely remember um so we can just go by sebastian um and yeah i'm actually uh technically still an assistant professor i'm just um exploring let's say the startup culture right now but i'm still technically at the university so that uh just wanted to mention that i i haven't left the university yet but yeah i'm really excited we can maybe talk about this even like about my new role as a lead ai educator at grid ai but yeah i will ask that you ask the questions before i just you know spontaneously um chat about things yeah yeah definitely definitely good it's good for the minor correction and i'll keep the sebastian name for for the reference for this podcast by the way if you want to keep it even shorter you can just go by step so there was one thing uh multiple people came up with that independently like seb sep because i was like uh i mean my my name is like eight eight letters right or might be nine eight um and it's pretty long and people i think don't want to say sebastian all the time so somehow it just happened that people recently called me sep and i was like why not actually so yeah to keep it um short and snappy yeah yeah definitely that works too yeah um but learning more about you as in uh so you have a unique roadmap of experience going from working with ai techniques going from applying a machine learning to computational biology to now being an educator where you are educating and making ml more accessible for students so what was your personal entry point into ai like what made you interested about it and pursue this as a major part of your career oh yeah that is um that is a long time ago when i was a student i uh i was really into a computational biology like solving uh problems around let's say on drug discovery so drug discovery is like loosely like a field where you are looking for potential small molecules that can have an effect let's say if there's a disease they can have an effect on let's say preventing the disease and for that it is like a search for the needle in the haystack and you are basically also interested in predicting things before you test things experimentally because it's very expensive to run experiments in a computation in a biology context because you have all the ex set up and all the let's say researchers that have to pipette things and stuff like that so my professor back then that was like when i was just new in grad school recommended me to take this class in uh it was called introduction to statistical pattern recognition or classification one of the two and it was a class about bayesian methods for predictions and i found this super interesting because at that point i was just coding things and coming up with rules myself it's actually almost like how people got motivated like developing machine learning like having the computer learn from the data and yeah back then i was just taking this class and i found it so fascinating that i just started studying it so we had this textbook by duda in stark uh i think it was just called pattern classification and then there was also more like a faculty in our or in the computer science department who was teaching uh data mining and i took this class as a follow-up but yeah this was basically the time where i really got into blogging sharing what i learned like when i wrote these blog posts about principal component analysis or rbf kernel svms and these types of things and yeah that got me really interested and most of it is then really um studying books and uh i also took back then uh andrew ang's online class the first cozera class ever i think it was like 2011 and i got really interested in that so yeah that's that's in a nutshell my journey yeah yeah it's it's always good to know about how many people have been inspired from courses by the andrewing like most of the people i know who got interested in a very simplistic sense into machine learning and ai happen to have that course being taken up every now and then so it's always uh good to know but uh one interesting thing that also like you mentioned is like you started off by reading books to versus now you're writing books that can help and and i think i i got a chance to take a look at the latest book which is which involves the psychic learn and by touch and i think like uh we already talked offline about this is like i really like the syllabus that you have plotted out in this books uh but before we go into the content of this book i wanted to learn like when you were a student like you said these books uh that help you understand the statistics uh sorry the implementation and the theory behind these techniques what was the point that helped you what was the set of resources that helped you regarding the implementation i assume back few years like there would be even lesser online resources that can help you uh with the basics of implementing debugging these and like revolving and hitting your head when the implementations don't work so what was what was your best practice for that yeah that is a good question because really uh like you suggested um still i think today there are not that many um let's say books or resources that really teach you uh how to yeah implement things it's mostly so if you look for books on implementations it's usually they are showing you how to use a library or let's say psychic learn tensorflow pytorch and so forth and i think this is important and it's great because that's how you would use things in practice you don't want to let's say write something from scratch because well you might make mistakes and if it's an important application let's say drug discovery it might lead to bad consequences if you have mistakes or some things don't work and also it takes a lot of time and then also efficiency wise your implementation is maybe taking uh three days to run where an existing one takes a few minutes um however i think it is a very important and useful exercise to implement things from scratch and um it's like a weird thing how i learned this uh it's bio reverse engineering almost so because in the class that i mentioned the um introduction to statistical pattern classification class we had homework in i think it was matlab yeah android x class was octave which is an open source version of matlab and for the homework we got like partial um let's say implementations of algorithms um but i was really i hated matlab so i was really um trying so also it was easier for me to be honest just to be coding in python because i was already familiar with python so i was taking this matlab thing and was just kind of like reverse engineering it in python so that i can then uh run the code and then also come up with a solution for the homework make sure everything works because i'm more confident in my python code and then i was taking the solution or the approach in python and was then reverse engineering it and implementing in matlab to submit the homework but yeah in that case i kind of learned by looking at other people's code in a sense but many things i also implemented from scratch just like um first i would say i call them first principles but um it's really like so also currently i'm working on a class where i take this approach where i implement things as simple as possible so i try to understand the algorithm like for example imagine a dot product so you can actually implement a dot product with just a python for loop um so you have a for loop and then let's say you have a weight and x and w and you just multiply them and sum them up with a for loop rather than let's say using dot product in a numpy and i try to when i implement things the first time to be as simple as possible i mean nowadays okay a dot product is maybe simpler for me because it's just like one command but if there's a new concept i usually try to not use anything fancy that is like mostly i find linear algebra is very helpful to write down things more compactly but sometimes uh you can have like these silent uh issues where you feel like you're doing the right thing but if the so it should throw an error but just happens that the dimensions match the columns and rows and then it works but the results are totally off or something so i try to um usually do things uh let's say as simple as possible get the code to run and then i write unit tests or just look at the output and have some examples and then i refine my code make it let's say more sophisticated while trying to really really get the same results so it's like a step where you make it as simple as possible so you can better read your code get the right results or let's say you think they are the right results and then you refine your code and i think this this process really helps with a learning it's the same thing when i um look at other people's code i usually take the code and run it like one bit at a time like adding breakpoints in a debugger and really trying to understand step by step what's happening because yeah i mean code is really complex and um for me personally it really helped um also looking at or collaborating on projects so i had this library ml extent where i implemented certain things some people contributed i looked or made try to make make things compatible with psychic learn and in this process when i was coding like these compatible things i learned a little bit more about how psychic learn works i learned how to read the code and also yeah nowadays it's i would say a lot of it is c plus plus code which is yeah pretty complicated but still if you spend some you basically have to spend the time with it and but if you spend the time you can easily um learn that i mean not easily but um it's really like uh taking one one thing at a time one step at a time and uh yeah that's i would say that is how i would say um yeah you can approach a problem i mean it's maybe sometimes frustrating if you only have so much time and then you look at this and it's like 200 lines of code but i need to have the results tomorrow or something like that but um yeah so it is it is tricky but i would say try uh try to yeah let's say solve one one thing at a time and start simple and yeah yeah yeah i really love the uh ideas and like you have learned much more on a hands-on basis so like you have you you start by implementing from scratch and you see what doesn't work then you go back trace back and then keep on one one by one step and until the end point that you reach uh but but one also think like which i completely agree to the idea like i work on a lot of image processing tools and the standard if you see back few years was matlab like it was it was the case but recently we have seen most of the deep learning models are uh have are having a lot of libraries or functionalities built inherently which uh which handle image processing even better than what matlab used to like matlab was priding for the for the kind of architecture it has for inventory processing so why do we why do you personally think like python is kind of becoming the standard that people are getting started with it and also developing high-end it's not just like for people who are beginning into this thing but also building like scalable applications that are much more uh relying on python is it is it the is it the ease of use that that's inherent to python or is it also the architecture behind python like this is just like a curious question yeah that's a good question i um i don't know the exact answer but it is somewhat related i would say to what you said uh the ease of use like what i like about i can just say maybe what i like about python and maybe that's also why other people are let's let's say there's this kind of momentum behind it and or the certain popul that got there's there's maybe like this turning point where it got somewhat popular and then it was like a snowball effect or something like that um so one thing that you mentioned is like it looks easy or it is very readable i think the fact that we have this indentation in python like makes code very readable and i'm not sure if you uh i've seen like it's mostly older papers like pseudo code where people write an algorithm in like some let's say arbitrary language and i feel like python is almost like that it is if you show some algorithm like a pseudocode in python or you can write it in python i think a lot of people who are not familiar with python would be able to read it because it is the way it's indented and um like if else and how everything's formatted no no um parentheses usually and stuff it makes things kind of readable and this gets you i think started with um like i don't know finding it pleasant to use but then at the other hand what i find is also really the community behind python is really uh what's maybe driving its success because ah there are so many great tools in python that make your life easier and all the resources i mean all the cool conferences scipy it's it's like this thing where you feel like okay a lot of people are using that and if i use that i have a lot of people um let's say if i have questions i can ask them i can look for tutorials and there are so many libraries that i can use and i think all of that together makes it really uh pleasant to use i mean it's of course not the most efficient language you can i mean i mean it's i would say no it's it's probably one of the worst languages when it comes to efficiency but it's also not a big deal because um it is usually more like a gluing language where you glue together more efficient implementations there was this article the uh the other day forgot the exact name i i tweeted about this like a couple of days ago it was like um the unreasonable rise of python in scientific computing something like that and um yeah so the a person who wrote this article argued that um yeah sure python is relatively slow by itself but it makes you first of all there's also the productivity of the developer so the time that it takes you to write the code and time it takes you to execute the code it's not always about just that the code runs faster so let's say you have to run an analysis only one time and it takes you three days to write the code maybe it runs in 10 seconds but so you have to spend three days to write the code in python maybe you can do this write the code in two days maybe it takes half an hour to run but in total you are faster towards getting the results if you then maybe deploy the algorithm on a server let's say google where it has to run like one billion queries every day then maybe you should think about re-engineering that but um most i think most daily tasks for machine learning and data scientists are really um also where you run things maybe once or twice but really it takes most of the time to just write the code itself and then there was this interesting part about this article which i found cool like an anecdote where the author mentioned an example where someone wanted to implement a nearest neighbor search and yeah sure if you use fortran or c plus the nearest neighbor search will be faster because the code is faster and you can maybe even write it very easily because it's just like the brute force version is just like you iterate through each data point and then um compute the distance and then sort the distances and pick the closest data point so i think this should be not too complicated in any language but then still um this is a very naive solution if you would check every neighbor and stuff so there are special data structures like um ball trees or kd trees uh and they are implemented in scipy and i think if you use something like python you're more likely to stumble upon them because you have all the documentation and tutorials then if you would be using c plus plus or fortran of course you can also of course implement a kd tree in fortran which is like a data structure that makes the lookup more efficient but i think you're more likely so that was the point of the article and i also believe so that you're more likely to find this if you're in an ecosystem like python where there's more resources around it it kind of encourages this kind of um reuse of existing libraries so yeah so the naive search would be faster in fortran but if you um use python with this kd3 you are even faster than that right so it's like this um that's what i think is cool about python because you have so many libraries and this huge ecosystem around it yeah yeah no i completely second that and this is something that even recently happened at my lab is like when python is really good when you want to like at least in research when you want to just quickly check your proof of concept like you just want to say okay if this works or not and in that case i don't want that overhead of implementing in c plus plus which will take me at least few days to just to see that okay this results actually don't work so it's like very quick um uh the other and we also joked about it like if um if psychic learn and numpy was monitor like if they were monetizing the use of library like this would be a big business because like everybody on the other end on research is using these tools and we are just glad these are like open source so yeah yeah yeah yeah so also one thing about this is like you mentioned yeah it's a great uh way for prototyping things too like getting the first draft out but then also there are really cool tools that can take your prototypes and make them really fast like cython xyton just had its uh 20th birthday like a few days ago so cyathon is like a library where you um compile your python code to or you can mix you can mix and match python and cpus plus code and i think yeah most of psychic learn uses python which is also then um the best of both worlds you have your prototype and then you don't even have to completely um rewrite something in a different language you use something like python which is great so i think there are lots of hacks in python where people kind of like make python work even though it's not the fastest there are like these tricks to make it fast and in uh for example pytorch which is a deep learning library for like um really uh i mean it's the deep learning libraries these days and um the main api is also through python and some people worry about okay if i use python and then this dynamic graph might be very slow compared to let's say using cuda directly yeah it is maybe a little bit slower but um pytorch also has this um c plus plus api and usually on average the overhead of just using python is just 10 so if you think about it if you train a model for let's say um 10 hours it's a difference of one hour if whether you use python or c plus plus um it is maybe i don't know if you're a big company you run this model every day one million times that makes maybe a difference but for a researcher if you wait 10 more you're always so busy you don't really mind waiting 10 percent or more because you save the time by writing the code right so in that case you make up for it for sure yeah definitely for researchers like the results are more interesting than actually the implementation so they they want to dwell more on the results and analysis rather than that one more thing if you don't mind this is actually um how i also got into a python is i was actually uh i started using r uh most of the time so my uh r and the command line for stuff there was like glue plot for plotting um and i used r for statistics and then i sometimes sometimes learned using the g plot for plotting and but then also with r i felt like i was not super productive in terms of data wrangling so i had this computational biology stuff where i had like these weird data sets and i wanted to extract data and um at least get the data into the right form so i wrote these scripts in python because with python i could quickly do that and then i was um yeah visualizing things in r and i always had to go like back and forth between two languages and then sometimes i was writing intermediate files and stuff and then yeah like you said most of the time you spend really or you care about the results and um also getting the results um easily i mean it doesn't if you have a plot it doesn't really matter which language you use because it's like um the execution time is very fast what you care about is uh how to format the data right and filter it and i was for some i mean your mileage may vary and i have a lot of colleagues who like are but i for some reason found python way easier for that so yeah also to get me to the results that is why i was adopting python because i could just format the data more easily and grab the data from the files and these types of things so it's a very also yeah one thing about it is it's very versatile i mean some people use python for building web applications like django and i don't know what the web application of frameworks are called nowadays but back then it was flask and django and then you have plotting or data science you have machine learning you have basically everything you can do in python it's very um very versatile which is really great yeah definitely definitely and and again like going back to the original question where we branched off this like basically you have written this uh very fantastic books like and the latest one talks more about pytorch and scikit learn but i believe there are earlier versions that actually also talk about the basics of python fundamentals and machine learning so can you talk more about like who this book is really for and like people who want to get a quick uh teaser into this is like who what does this book cover like what what does this set of books cover from start till the end and who this book is really for so if they're interested uh who should get into it yeah yeah so uh the book machine learning with um high torch and second learn is is almost like two books like the title suggests so it's like machine learning with psychic learn and then also or the first part is second learn and the second part is really pie torch but i think you know why i like also grouping it uh into one book was that it gives the readers a journey because nowadays we have machine learning the traditional machine learning without neural networks and we have deep learning which is based on deep neural networks and one common question i mean also i teach two classes at the university one is introduction to machine learning and pattern classification and one is introduction to deep learning and generative modeling and so one class is machine learning and one class is deep learning and sometimes students ask me well which class should i take and i would say um ideally both not because well i want to advertise my classes but also because i think it really uh depends on what type of problem you want to solve and there are different let's say um emphasis um so with regular machine learning with the first part of the book so first of all who it's for it's i would say um anyone who's interested in machine learning and deep learning and the only requirement i would say is uh maybe python programming having some some knowledge in python ideally also numpy it's not like i would say a strong requirement but yeah being a little bit familiar with that i think that would be good but otherwise it's really for everyone who who's interested in using machine learning and deep learning and really getting started and so with machine learning um this part also similar to my course what i cover is really uh what is the classification algorithm and how how do we evaluate our models how do we um do hypermeta tuning how do we improve the performance how do we measure that this is really um a meaningful improvement how do we get the data into the right shape like how do i have to format my data how do i if i have let's say categorical variables how do i encode them correctly like really getting set up for um the machine learning i would say mindset like how to use machine learning and then also the non-deep learning machine learning what it is really good at or what it was originally developed for is these tabular data sets almost like basically spreadsheet data and then for deep learning i mean why deep learning is really like useful and powerful and impressive is it's more like for this unstructured data so with unstructured data i mean more like image data or text something that is not in this table form and if you think about it like this back in the day um yeah it was very difficult to let's say process large data sets and everything and also um regular machine learning algorithms they suffer from something called like the course of dimensionality so if you have an image even something like uh mnist which is like 28 by 28 that's 784 pixels it's 70 84 dimensions if you will and um machine learning algorithms they would traditional ones would overfit it would mean basically what they would be trying to do is memorize exact pixel locations so if you are trying to classify let's say a number like the number seven it would try to memorize exact pixel locations and that is not good because well if you move the number a little bit over to the left or to the right it's still the same number but the machine learning algorithm because it try to memorize the exact position might fail um and get deep learning so how to prevent that would be for example extracting features manually so like uh taking some measurements and maybe writing some other features down um there's this famous iris data set so iris data iris are like certain flowers and the task is to predict what um what species of the flower it is and how you could do this nowadays is like you could take pictures of these flowers and then train a deep learning algorithm back then how people solve this problem was like taking measurements so someone took a measurement took a ruler and measured how wide and how tall the leaves are and writing this down in a table so if you do this if you take a measurement of the length of a leaf it's it's one feature then you take the width of the leaf it's two features and there are two different types of leaves one is called sepal and petal so you end up with four features instead of if you have let's say um a thousand by thousand pixel image with a high resolution camera a camera you have one million features so you reduce the one million features to four features i mean this is then good input for machine learning the only thing is you have to know what you are measuring right because um is maybe the flower dimens or the leaf dimension even useful for classification so for that you need like these types of domain experts who come up with the yeah let's say the idea what we want to measure what is maybe useful for the machine learning classifier but yeah we have many types of data where we have something like that and this is like a good i would say case for machine learning and then if you're a little bit more ambitious if you um let's say want to remove this um intermediate step or feature extraction deep learning basically solves the problem uh like learning from image or text data directly and so in this book we start with these simple data sets that are these tables and then we go to deep learning later where we really if we have image data and text data but also also of course i mean to be really honest if you work in a in a company or even like for your hobby projects you don't always have images it really depends on what problem you want to solve if you want to develop a spam classifier you you have text data right so you need a different algorithm or different approach for that and in this book we cover a variety of different methods for different type of types of data sets so one is for example also on graph data so like coming back to the computational biology background or context where we have molecules and molecules are basically you can think of them as atoms connected by uh yeah by by covalent bonds which are then uh you can think of it as a graph and so there are different types of data and different types of data require different types of algorithms but in a nutshell this book is really for everyone interested in machine learning and deep learning and it split i would say roughly into two parts getting familiar with machine learning and then going to deep learning if you have let's say image or text data actually there's one data set in it we move what i that i use throughout the book at least three times it's the uh it's a classic data set but it's simple and it's i would say moderately interesting it's the imdb movie review data set which is a collection of 50 000 uh movie reviews and there i mean it's a relatively i would say large data set if you think about 50 000 sound like a lot but for deep learning it's not that much so one one difference is also or one thing to mention is deep learning really requires a lot of data it's attractive because you can solve problems without having domain knowledge you can just let's say feeded images i mean domain knowledge doesn't hurt but you don't have to let's say manually extract features from the images but then you also need much more data and so with this movie data set we use it three times once is in the sentiment analysis chapter in chapter i think eight where we um use a traditional machine learning algorithm there's a way you can transform this data into a tabular form with a back of words model and i forgot the numbers but it might be something let's say 89 accuracy or something so you build a classifier with traditional machine learning with 89 accuracy and then we go to deep learning and we implement something called a recurrent new network and i think the accuracy is even lower because um well deep learning is more powerful but at the same time it requires more data and 50 000 is maybe not quite enough for deep learning so it's also something to consider when you are thinking about which method to use it's it's always good to um let's say i would say start with simple bass lines like using a method that is not super complicated see what results you get before you let's say go to the more expensive method like deep learning because sometimes the simpler method already solves the problem and also you know okay maybe this is simpler and even more efficient than me like training these expensive neural networks but then yeah we use it a third time in the transformer section where we um fine tune one of these uh bird models the be rt the big uh transformer models and there we get actually better performance than um with the simple method i think the performance is let's say 92 or 93 percent accuracy but then see the caveat is this takes like uh i don't know three hours to train on a gpu or something like that compared to the simple classifier and psychic learn which takes a few minutes so it's always a trade-off so yeah yeah but that was like a very long answer to a very short question sorry no no but i mean it makes sense i mean you covered from a lot of techniques like starting from very basic so i think we covered like graph graph database we also covered transformers we also covered deep learning techniques so i mean i'm already i'm glad you mentioned about the graph because that was one of the chapters i quickly jumped to because i'm recently working with a new type of data set which is like rna-based sequencing and we are trying to see if the uh if the mod if the rns structure would basically confirm to its true value and that's where i'm trying to learn about graph convolution neural networks and also understanding how people are using uh graph data sets into deep learning so that that was something i jumped to into that book because i wanted to start from the basic i understand how the um how we used to treat like graph data sets in in our past you know like the classic data structures algorithms like where we are using graph data sets for uh traveling salesman problem and dijkstra's algorithm and all those things but yeah that is something i'm coming back so rna in oh sorry rna in terms of the uh ribo what was it reboot nucleic acid uh yes yes yeah i learned about this long time ago so that's also basically where you have nuclear types right and each nucleotide would be then one point in your graph or yes yes yes so they are i think i mean i'm i'm bad at the whole terminology for these i understand all these things only from a data set perspective but i think there are like around four uh nucleotides which basically connect to each other and they are interested like like humans have these long chains of rna structures and you basically have to make sure if this structure is stable or not and there are i think like millions of combinations that could be possible and there are some there are some already techniques who can judge those uh structure stability what they call scores is basically if if you arrange all these uh like there are a g t u c and all those uh value numbers uh but we treat them as numbers i don't know the medical significance or biological significance to this but you basically give this score to a structure and the highest the score meaning it has the highest probability of actually occurring in real life so they are using deep learning techniques to actually see how it will unfold and fold these rna structures all right yeah it's it's a sequence but it can also fall into a three-dimensional structure right like the tertiary structure yeah a long time ago like 10 20 you know 15 years ago yeah but it's interesting yeah yeah yeah definitely but yeah that was more like a question from a student's perspective like what is this book about and what i'm learning but i want to do i'm curious about a question from an author's perspective because i'm a person who is like actively now involved as a writing page like writing my work as in like publishing stuff where we we try to uh map what we did to like a paper and condensing it into very uh sustained form so i'm curious like what goes into writing a good technical book because this is something very very um i personally i think i would be very challenged if i were to write a book because talking about implementation takes a lot of uh i would say effort to actually make sure that every like to under making sure the audience uh understands in a very broad range of spectrum and when i'm even also helping my lab med debugger problem it's like a very very bad answer that i can give even he or she would have a very very hard time to understand so i want to learn like what was your thought process first of all deciding to write a book and secondly what exactly goes into writing a technical book like technical book is something very rare like you don't find a lot of books who write technical implementation stuff so yeah i wanted to know your thought process uh that's a good question what made me uh write this book actually the simple answer is um yeah the publisher reached out at some point and i said yes that was the short answer but um yeah so but i was thinking about this should i do this or not and you know as a student you are busy right so it's like should you do it or not but then at some point i was like okay i like writing and maybe it's a fun challenge let me try uh so but yeah i would say as a student i was busy now i'm even busier so i'm kind of like glad that i did this then uh like the first book because that wasn't a template for my later book so i basically extended this um but yeah so i i think it it helps me what i like about writing is it helps me also um getting things out of my head onto paper it's like you know when you take notes it's like um you think about something and you try to keep thinking about it how things work and sometimes it's just helpful to write it down somehow because then you don't have to constantly think about it and you know okay it's in a safe place if i ever need this again i know where to find it and the book um for me it was more like the book was the more polished version of that so where i was like okay these are my interesting concepts things i feel like are very interesting and exciting and i've done them at some point i have maybe rough notes but let's say i i need them in the future again or something like that so if you write that down in a book once nicely you have that for life basically so sometimes i mean nowadays let's say i don't use something very frequently like the graph new network i don't want to write this from scratch every time i i know okay i have done that one time well i can then go there and copy and paste it and then make adjustments so it's basically almost like my personal knowledge base and at the same time um it's fun it's like you get to share it you write the book and some people find it useful and i really like let's say getting feedback and sometimes also uh people ask you really tricky questions about things you have never thought about and this is also a way to learn so i feel like writing a book is like almost like um a more advanced like you learn something and then you think about it and you write it down and sometimes you get feedback and this uh writing down and getting feedback is really like um it goes beyond the regular learning because you're not just absorbing um the language of the knowledge you are kind of like actively processing it and then even extending it and yeah i like that i like learning it's like every day i try to spend at least one hour reading another book or let's say watching some talks so i try to always learn new things and um writing down is things is also part of my learning process in a way so and there's this also challenge i don't know why but i really like this is like thinking about the structure of books and articles and these types of things i don't know it's maybe my uh my i have like this thing where i like organize things people make fun of it but my computer is super organized all the folders and everything has like a certain process and the same is true for me for like knowledge organization like how you put things um together and um yeah and writing a book is also like the challenge is like in which order do you cover things and there are pros and cons uh and you have to weigh them kind of carefully especially with a big field like machine learning everything is connected and you always you can't be perfect you can only try to let's say minimize um like i would say not conflicted but you want to minimize concepts or the introduction of concepts um if you don't explain them right away but then at the same time you don't want to explain everything at the given moment because then you get bogged down into detail so it's like this uh fun little challenge how you in which order you introduce concepts i i like that a lot for some reason it's like a fun one exercise yeah yeah definitely i mean that makes sense why you are better at this because you are much more structured uh into delivering knowledge which makes sense i mean that completely suits your uh line of careers i mean yeah i mean kudos to you for doing that because not even even i think when i'm referring to a lot of online resources which i think are still like not the best but i think they are the only good resources you see them and you can obviously see those limitations but i mean now being if i were to write a blog i would have the same challenges because it's just too many thoughts going on how do i make sure i start from abc and then go to the z part versus like having a whole uh zigzag part to it so yeah i mean yes for that for doing that yeah so i uh maybe like one little tip but i maybe doesn't work for everyone but when i write things how i do it is i first make a mind map so it's basically like almost like an outline in a system different software for that but what i really like is just putting your thoughts on there like all the things that just come to mind you have a topic and you just write it all down could be totally unorganized and then you try to order them and you try to make a hierarchy and in that way um you are thinking before like your writing so you basically make the outline all the topics that are related and once you have that once you have like this structure i feel like the writing becomes much easier i think the hardest part is really if you just have a blank page and you start writing because i think then it becomes a mess and because then you you write something and you maybe realize okay that was maybe not ideal but at this point it's very expensive to move it to a different section because it's it's a flow and you have to kind of pick it apart again so i feel like um also it's kind of like daunting to have like a white page and then just starting writing for me personally how i like to organize things but it is again just me maybe it works differently for others it's really like putting things down in a mind map and then rearranging things to make sense of the order and then i usually export this into markdown and have these headlines and sometimes even paragraphs and then just fill in the blanks it's really like going from structure first to like filling in the blanks which really helps me with um like yeah i don't know not being afraid of the writing it's like okay i know what has to go where i just have to spend some time uh filling in these blanks basically yeah yeah no i mean i mean i love that i love that like i could only wish i could do that as efficiently as you're saying but yeah i mean i i love the idea um and and going going outside so so going into the idea like once let's say we have learned these skills from most of the most of the tutorials you see in lectures uh that we we get to learn from professors are working on toy datasets like iris and uh even mnist uh we feel they are they are toy data assets and we when we go on to research or even in the industry when we are working on some real data sets i see at least i personally noticed like there are a lot of challenges that we we haven't known but we normally figure out on the way so what kind of things you would say for people who who who are on the journey to learning from these books or at least tutorials but something when we go into the real world when we we work on some actual data sets like raw data sets collected from scanners in case of healthcare or even from other equipments what are the things that people should expect that based on you you would have insights on when we apply these machine learning techniques it's often the case like data pre-processing and data data pipeline is like a very crucial role that i have personally learned like how what would you say what what insights would you have when people are trying to deal with these machine learning tools when they work on work on real data sets versus toy data sets yeah so i would say um based on my collaborations with people in other let's say departments uh like let's say social sciences and biology i think the challenges i think the first the biggest challenge is how to get uh so basically what are you trying to solve right um it would be one uh so like putting like down the expectation like what do you want to do uh when is it good enough or how do you evaluate the success and then like when it comes really to the implementation really what type of data do i need and in what form so a lot of problems um there is data but the data is maybe not in the right form for machine learning it's like it's this uh it's a big challenge it's like let's say uh there was like a project um we worked on it was on predicting uh whether a video contains conspiracy content or not and then really what type of um data do you need like okay we have videos but how do you get the videos into the right format we could also use deep learning for that of course based on on frames but it's then the channel you have to think about okay how do you uh present the data first you have to download it you have to maybe format it you have to label it and um so in this case like getting the the data so what is your data how does it look like how do you get that into a right shape for your method what methods do you want to consider um what is like your expectation in terms of performance and yeah these types of things there's lots of lots of challenges so another project we worked on was on um let's maybe i don't want to maybe uh say all the details because i don't know how let's say um sensitive this is so let's say in an abstracted form we were interested in classifying emails and we had a 50 000 emails and we wanted to do there was a certain type of classification task and um the problem then is really okay we have 50 000 emails no labels how do you approach that right and i mean you can use traditional machine learning you can use deep learning and um there are within deep learning many different methods there are many other considerations like data cleaning so how do you even start so writing down a process is maybe a good idea so maybe just implementing a simple baseline um there are for example dictionary based approaches you can say like if an else statements if these words are there then it's let's say this type of email like if you categorize it by a topic like climate technology politics and stuff like that you can maybe use a dictionary based approach as your baseline uh then you can do regular machine learning you can use um you know logistic regression or naive based classifier in the back of words model um then you can use rnns you can use transformers and for each of them you also need a different level of data right so for the dictionary based approach it's not a training method really it's um just based on dictionary you don't have to train a model so for that yeah small number of data points this is not i mean you don't even even need any data points you just need a test set to make sure how good is this but then for the machine learning you maybe need 50 or 100 emails at least how do you get these so who's labeling them you can maybe label them yourself you can ask your colleagues but then also you have to make sure things are consistent right so and then for deep learning you may need hundreds or hundreds of thousands of labeled emails is this even feasible can you maybe use a related data set and pre-train your model and so i would say always starting organizing it starting with the simplest thing so starting with a dictionary based approach right so maybe it gives you the balanced data set 80 accuracy then you use machine learning you notice okay i only get 70 accuracy with my naive bayes classifier maybe the model is not good enough but maybe i don't have enough data maybe i only have 100 data points labeled and maybe that's not enough so you could uh come up with let's say a hypothesis and say okay maybe more data is um helpful rather than like switching to a different methods rather rather than spending time tuning hyper parameters maybe i should just collect more data and i think in practice that is one thing i noticed in collaborations is um for people who let's say don't work so much with deep learning or machine learning is let's say they encounter on the news or in general articles that are very impressive so they think it's reasonable to get really good performance but in in practice um yeah it may be true but only mostly on benchmark data sets and then if things don't work it's easy like what i noticed is a pattern it's easy to say then let's try a different method let's or let's tune this more let's run grid search like for three days or something but sometimes it's just in this email example more productive to just maybe label a few more data points so instead of trying to use instead of logistic regression like base or support vector machines maybe we should just sit down for for an hour and label 30 more emails and see if that improves the performance so so like managing the expectations is one of the challenges i think and also really um organizing what you want to do in which order because there are infinitely many things you can try yeah yeah and i want to extend that uh that statement a little bit as in the question that we were doing is um definitely number of a number of samples is a big criteria when we are dealing with machine learning techniques first versus deep learning techniques and i think it it gets really tricky or confusing for most of the students when they get started is like we have these uh very small uh close regions where we are using svm classifiers versus mlp classifiers so it's really hard like most of the times they might be giving similar performances or either svm could give a better performance but it's more like it it seems like an ad hoc right like you said like we should start with a simpler word and see if a deep learning base like a neural net based architecture can work better but are there any more parameters that you can uh you can you would suggest that people should monitor in order to make their uh make their intuition like which model i should use of course grid search is definitely one of the solutions but would you would you have any insights on to which other parameters that they could monitor or at least uh make sure that they have a look out for when they are trying to decide which technique i want to use of course like the brute force technique is always there i start off from the over here from uh very simplistic to the most expensive ones but would you suggest any any other insights that based on your experience where people should also look for number of number of annotations or number of uh samples is definitely one of them but you have any insights for other parameters um yeah maybe uh continuing briefly with the number of samples yeah one thing uh to monetize um learning curves where you you have your training set your existing training set and you um plot the performance let's say on the same data set on the same validation data set for different uh sizes of the training set so let's say you have your training data set then you take 90 percent of the data set the training data set fit the model look at the validation set performance then you take 80 percent look at the validation performance 70s uh 60 50 40 until you are at 10 percent and you see if there's a a trend if you had more data if it would improve so that would be one thing i would say looking for if if there's a possibility you if you could label more data then this would be very powerful it can tell you whether it's even worthwhile or not and how how worthwhile it is um another thing is really making sure that you don't overfit which is very um challenging it sounds easy uh so we use a validation set we use cross validation but even i noticed in practical applications it's easy to overfit on k-fold cross-validation even and for example i had this case in a real-world data set where i wanted to get really good performance and i was not satisfied and we had this data set it had only 100 or so samples and we had a test set also with hundreds and so samples relatively small and i wanted to really get good performance so um i tried uh gradient boosting which is usually a good method but i wanted to really squeeze out more performance so what i did is i thought okay i have it's not urgent i have time so let me run something for two weeks so i set up this crazy um oh it wasn't two weeks but like a couple of days so i set up this crazy big um randomized search um so in circuit learn with a gradient boosting classifier and tuned i don't know like it was maybe a million hyper parameter configurations and then i really uh got a good one but on k-fold cross-validation then when i applied it to the uh test set it was still not very good because um it was basically exploiting the um the splits it basically it was just coincidentally good on the careful cross-validation i mean technically it prevents you from overfitting but the more things you explore at some point you just get lucky that this particular configuration performs well on the k4 cross validation random seed that you are splitting with so in that case one thing also might be worthwhile considering now be mindful of like really how many hyper parameters you tune don't go crazy or if you do you really need more um you need like maybe uh you have to run repeated k4 cross validation for example and then really you can ask okay if i do all this crazy stuff isn't it worthwhile just to collect more data instead of just doing this because you're exploiting really um too much so it's also like uh maybe there's a way okay i don't need to let's say go crazy on hyper printer tuning of course it's important but um one million settings is maybe overkill and you end up like exploiting patterns in the way you partition your data so maybe it's worthwhile thinking about is there maybe some other approach like working with the data and one popular area of research or application is um this new uh i mean it's called data data centric uh data centric ai some people say it's not new at all i mean yeah it is not really a new idea to manipulate your data set to get better performance but data centric ai um is a field i think there is some novelty in that in in the sense that you want to spend more time on developing let's say methods for exploring the data set and uh modifying the data set rather than let's say on the model so basically keeping the model fixed but changing the data set to get better model performance and i think that is something also worthwhile i have done this a little bit in a non-systematic uh let's say a sense but i think this is also something worthwhile in a real world application where you have especially small data to really spend more time with the data and see what you can do there rather than just with a model yeah yeah i mean i can not emphasis more enough like as in this is this is something highly relevant to one of the recent work that i'm doing which is which we are using the rest net models which are like the benchmark of uh imaging models that we can use right now and i cannot emphasize when i when i was talking to my professor and showing my baseline results as in like i just use my mri scans as the data input that i have 3d resnet model and we are doing some uh prediction thing regression image based regression tools over there and the performances were very bad and definitely rest net was not to blame because net is already outperformed on any every other dataset and we spent almost i would say more than three months just to make sure uh first of all how how are we creating these folds how are we organizing like mapping the age distributions uh and mri scans accordingly making sure that there are not repeated scans of there are few patients like i have an mri scan at age 25. i also have an mri scan h830 but that just means we are two same people so making sure there are not overlapping over there uh normalizing the data sets uh making sure we are using instance normalization not batch normalization so i think i mean i can just go on to the details but i think it it just resonates and sounds more what you said is saying data centric ai is maybe not that much popular back then but i think it's it has been very crucial to deep learning at least uh to making sure that data goes very correctly inside the model because what goes around comes out that's the uh that's the ideology so yeah yeah i i i yeah and um related to what you said it's like also even sometimes useful i think having humans look at some data because i forgot where it was but i saw this article where people um had i think it was mri or x-rays and um they got really good performance but it turned out that there was like a watermark in certain types of images so the model i mean on paper if you use any performance metric it would perform really great because it it does perform great but there's this little um side effect that it was using this watermark which is non-intentional and you can't really with objective metrics you can't capture that you really have to let's say um maybe uh look at this and understand things or what you could do is maybe you can um do something like red cam or guided back prop and you highlight this but still you need to have someone looking at the results at failure cases or successful cases and think about this to uh make sense so not everything can be automated it's maybe one one good takeaway exactly exactly and and it comes with the next question that i had for you but maybe i'll take a detour on the machine learning thing and maybe ask you about a few of the things that are about trends as in like you have been in in this uh like you have been uh making the things accessible in terms of blogs video tutorials and whatsoever manner starting from the very basics like basic from statistical analysis to whole to the deep learning and nowadays if you see people who are getting interested into the deep learning tool they they find this very whole uh resource of things like they are pretty much confused like as in what do i start with because there are lots of techniques lots of good published articles that can claim good results and nowadays like in the very reason we see like large models right like we as a student or as an individual contributor you won't be able to run these models like uh it could be gpd three large language models uh i think the uh the palm and dolly that really recently came out what what what insights do you have like as in what what opinions would like i wouldn't say opinions but as in like from your understanding of experience and how the field is progressing do you think large models are gonna be there uh for a long time or is it something that like we are not improving the architecture per se but we are just expanding the architecture versus uh when we have this bigger data sets so in terms of your own experience what do you think like would large models really solve the issue or do we have to really think in a very architecture efficient way in order to solve these problems like let's say multi modality and lots of other problems that we have uh what what what has been your experience so far if you can share yeah that is uh interesting question uh very uh very tricky i would say um right now i mean the recent success of these uh big models i've i would say it justifies looking more into it and doing more research on that but then at the same point it's like where do we stop where do we draw the boundary because the models become so big that we can't really use them anymore so how how does it help us if we have big models that we can't really use anymore um and it goes also a little bit um too like or the directions like what do we want the model to do and where do we want to do it and i don't know so if you have like a smartphone and you want to have a prediction that should work offline so it has to be on the phone um so whatever algorithm so maybe in that case well these big models are useless because they're too large for running on a phone so in that case well that's maybe not what i want but if i if i am google and i want the best possible let's say query for search um maybe you run this on a big server and this is okay i mean so it really depends i think there's no one size fits all solution i think every model has its place one thing i should say though is um yeah these are big models they require a lot of resources to train but you don't necessarily have to train them always from scratch this is like the i think the premise behind it that um you can train them on a general purpose data set and then you can fine tune them and yeah in my book in the transformer chapter we did that with uh the bird model the bird model by the way it was uh too big for the gpu memory um so i used uh distilled bird which is like a so distilled version is like a version that's a little bit pruned it has fewer parameters but has almost the same performance and yeah i was fine-tuning that uh on that uh imdb movie data set the performance was better than with a recurrent neural network but i think it took multiple hours to train and the rnn took five minutes to train which is also uh one thing to consider right so you get maybe three four percent uh improvement on that data set but um at what cost at like three four hours instead of five minutes it's like so much more expensive and i feel like yeah depending on what you want to do i wouldn't say they solve all our problems especially when maybe it goes towards like new data sets that are let's say very different from the data sets that the models were pre-trained on there's a chance you can still find unit it performs well but um yeah i wouldn't say i think it's it's interesting and important to go into this direction let's see what happens but i think other models still have their place and i think we are just right now a little bit i would say stuck with existing methods so svms random forests have been around forever um 20 years and there are still sometimes a research paper that makes a little improvement but it's really like i would say the low-hanging fruit in that area has been harvested and the same i would say maybe not so much but the same is somewhat true with cnns um i think like five years ago we had a new architecture every month that was like groundbreaking now yeah we still have new architectures but it's a bit slower right so in that case people are looking for let's say something new to explore and transformers are just right now the thing um at the same point i think as soon as someone finds a non-transformer model or method that is let's say cheaper i think everyone would be super excited so i think right now partly people work on these big transformer models because they are the best we have but i don't think i don't know maybe i'm wrong but i don't think anyone is um happy about the fact that they are so big i think everyone would wish they would be smaller and as soon as something comes along that is uh smaller and let's say better performing or even similarly performing like a new architecture i think everyone would be super excited and jump to the new architecture but that's just my my my thought or my my thinking yeah no i mean to me it makes sense i mean it really depends on the application like if you are focusing too much on the very minor details of accuracy like you said big firms like who are who are very heavily invested in like even the minute improvements they don't care about computation resources for them large language sorry large models in general would be a good fit but for people who just want a proof of concept or just one want to try out a different technique in order to solve the problem for them it would be still focusing on uh like you already mentioned like if if you had the option of using recurrent neural network if the performance stop is not much of a big uh issue then i think they would stick with uh recurrent neural network rather than going to fine-tune birds so yeah yeah that makes a lot of sense and and and i want to tie back to the one of the other things like the grad cam thing that you mentioned right like this this this was something even i i stumbled onto a lot and i want to learn your perspective on it like do you think interpretably or the whole idea of explanatory like explaining a model's predictions and models uh working in general is like a big big uh area of effort for the research community like would you say like when we deploy these models like f from uh academia perspective we just care about those tables and metrics like like if i'm meeting a state of art that's like a very important thing but when we deploy these models in real world scenarios like the watermark example that you gave do you think these kind of uh tools like grad cam or similar these kind of tools uh are an ac are should be an active area of interest of research when we are deploying these models or like i think you would have a better perspective of understanding what these models would look like when they deploy get deployed in the real world do you think it's gone it's going to be a major area of expertise that would be required when we are deploying actively deploying these models uh in the real world yeah i think i'm not an expert i must say in interoperable machine learning um by the way christoph molnar he has a new book on his topic he i would say would be more like a person who can maybe answer this more confidently or more correctly but i would say to my knowledge interpretable machine learning is still a very um let's say uh not new area but uh we are not there where we want to be right now i think so right now i think it's still very hard to um explain models so we have these tools like grad cam or lime or sharp values and so forth but i think to be honest just maybe my opinion but i feel like they are more like diagnostic tools that you use during the development it's something you use when you want to debug your model like like we may talked about with this watermark you use maybe greatcam or something else that highlights something and it's maybe saying okay maybe you should look into this but it's not giving you the explanation it might not even be correct maybe it's highlighting something that doesn't have any meaning so so the fact that it doesn't i mean so as a user if you are giving this model to someone like a doctor for like um like diagnosing patients i think this is not super helpful and could maybe even be i don't know if it could be harmful maybe it can be but it's more something we use internally to to let's say diagnose problems if they are there but it is i don't think these methods are there yet for like deployment so i don't think um they are like capable enough so what we really want is something more about like predicting what why the model makes a prediction right so that is what most people care about and i don't think we have methods for that yet i mean we have workarounds but it it's it's not reliable and i don't think they are there yet so if i'm a doctor i want to know like um why let's say if you have a scan an x-ray scan or mri scan and the prediction is that say the person has cancer well no cancer i i i think if it just highlights this region okay uh well it highlights it so but what does it mean what does the highlighted region mean does the what does the model see we don't really know we maybe know where the model looks at but we don't really know what the model sees it could be just a pixel that is flipped or it could be a certain shape and i think what we want is more like i don't know like um some some output that says we see this black spot here in the center and this is why i think i the model think it could be cancer right and then as a researcher i could say okay well as a doctor i can say okay i can look at this black dot but you know this is not it or it is maybe true maybe i should zoom in on to that and i think we don't have this um level of diagnostic tools yet we don't have something that gives such a concrete answer leonie i think the only thing that might be useful in practice is like uh counterfactuals a little bit if you have a tabular data set see that also doesn't apply to images but if you have a because the feature i think the problem yeah that's a good point the the problem are maybe that the the features themselves are not interpretable so if you look at an image it's just made up of pixels and um the model looks at pixels it had a convolutional network has like these filters that extract um features from the images from the pixels but there is no labeling of these features so they're still just arbitrary let's say features and yeah i mean it's not very let's say um i don't even know how to tackle it if you have an image the model makes a prediction based on the abstract features which are based on some original pixels so the the answer would be more like okay pixel 3 is a brightness 0.5 and pixel 5 as this and this and this and this and all together this is because of this threshold that i predict this person has cancer and but these um pixels they don't mean anything to a human in a way because they're just pixels so we would have to have some type of meta features almost like you know like two types of models one model that um that extracts meta features like i don't know one module or something like that and then a method based on that classifying it and then at least you could uh interpret these meta features or something i don't know but uh what i wanted to also get at like counter factuals it's like um you're analyzing how much do i have to change something in order to get a desired outcome and i think this can be sometimes useful for certain data sets if you think about let's say um uh like a bank uses a system to break whether someone should get a loan or a credit card approved or not and if you have features that are let's say intuitive for human or interpretable i'm not saying these are good features but let's say one feature is celery one feature is i don't know like h or something like that um and you do a counter factual analysis you basically you can increase and decrease the age and see how it changes the outcome of the prediction and the same for the salary and this is something you can then communicate you can then say to a customer okay if you had let's say a slightly higher salary like 5000 more then we would have approved it because then the algorithm would be above the threshold i feel like at that level yeah the interpretable methods are somewhat useful but of course this doesn't apply to images because then you say okay if this pixel was brighter then we would predict something else and yeah it's tricky i think it's still an active area of research but um yeah but i'm also not an expert i was just uh explaining my thoughts about this but yeah you know i i uh this is an interesting thing maybe i need to think more about it also like as you said about the meta features which is which is something i really love because we have the whole uh target label but we have millions of features like normally when we say like a medical image which is like a three-dimensional image which is like more than one one million pixels and we don't have really like cnns create these feature maps in multiple layers and it tries to classify but we don't really have any uh labels for them so yeah i mean yeah you gave a very nice pointer to thinking about it so yeah i mean i'll keep that topic for sure and one one last uh one one few last questions i want to cover before we end the podcast is uh your thought process into uh like not a lot of people are aware about like what exactly the research field or academia looks like when they are working with machine learning or deep learning techniques so what can you what can you share or what advice would you give to people who are considering uh pursuing research into the machine learning or deep learning uh academia field it could be either they are interested into research in industry uh but primarily working on research problems or they could be a phd student or even just doing their thesis work involving machine learning research so what are the things like learning from a very implementation like we got the understanding like okay this is uh these are the basics this is how uh care nearest neighbors or something really work this is how you implement it and once these things are done then comes the research part so what advice would you give or what insights you would give for people who want to get started into research that hey this is something you you might be in for uh when you're signing up for a phd or like a job joining a job that involves machine learning research oh uh yeah i that's a very interesting question i don't want to be discouraging anyone but i think um it is challenging be prepared to um see things that don't work i think when we see papers uh it always looks like so easy in hindsight it looks like oh this is obvious um yeah sure this is a very easy even if you think about a dropout like the technique where you are just dropping notes it sounds so easy right it's like oh this is just like an easy method and sometimes yeah you might have this intuitive idea hey why don't i just try this and it might work and then you can find an explanation for that but then i think most i would say 90 of the time you have these ideas and they don't work you try them and they don't work and i think the key is not getting frustrated by that like um being uh like realistic like okay not every idea i'm trying will work and yeah this this mindset of being prepared that most of the ideas probably won't work um yeah it sounds maybe frustrating but see i think there's still always a useful lesson in there because when you work on things you get experience so i would say the time is not wasted because you're still implementing things you're trying things out and honestly i would almost say i don't think many people do that but well if you want to get even more out of it maybe you can write a blog post you maybe can't publish a paper but maybe share that because other people um will maybe want to try something similar at least you can warn them hey this doesn't work and um also the thing is uh i think what's important nowadays is uh you're mentioning like um a thing like when if you want to go into industry and um i think building a portfolio is important i i think nowadays there are a lot of people on getting into machine learning and deep learning and um yeah you want to be a little bit uh unique i mean everyone can take classes right so if you take classes you get good grades i don't think um that is enough anymore today let's say because um so many people do that and i think working on cool projects is a good way also to learn in that case like you said um if you do research uh so back to the point like uh trying things out some things work and don't work but i think i mean of course people who focus only on theory but i think based on what i'm interested in also uh trying out things um getting like practical experience uh is very useful because then you also can apply that to other areas and also with um with that i think it's good early on to apply or to to dive not only into deep learning but also like um what is the open source community doing like uh are there interesting things i can try out on things to improve or let's say improve myself productivity-wise like using github and uh maybe version like version control with github unit testing and maybe setting up a ci like a continuous integration server on github workflows that tests my code like practicing these things i think is also very useful because later on i noticed that right now when you go into a company people it's how people work and you you have to also maybe um yeah get used to working in a team because in a phd i noticed that because i was in a very small group um you often work alone and it can be sometimes good to like work with others together and the open source community is usually very welcoming so contributing maybe to an open source project of course you don't want to make this like 90 of your day you want to be careful with your time that most of the time is aligned with let's say your research but i i think it's also the time where you where you learn other things and um yeah i think being open being exploratory being open to exploration and collaborations i think it's uh one thing i would also say uh maybe you should look out for during the phd yeah yeah yeah i love that and one thing i wanna i wanna extend is like you said like there are lots of people are coming into machine learning which makes sense i mean uh even from a research perspective like i joined my research in 2020 right so and when i when i was like i think this is still we are in the face of people publishing a lot of papers a lot of good papers that are coming out every week i think like if if you follow like i follow a lot of academics on twitter and like it feels like uh uh me posting on instagram is like equivalent to their posting papers on twitter so it's very hard to keep up with uh such amount of um work and they i mean they're excellent works so it's not something that they're publishing anything random so how do you personally uh make sure that you are uh reading the best of the kind of papers or at least uh ideas uh because as a student maybe i'm a very naive person so maybe i don't have that filter set like okay this is what i want to read this is what i maybe not relevant to my activity of research so how do you basically like my question would be how do you cope up with such amount of uh pump of papers every now and then uh at least yeah yeah that is a very um tricky and important question because you want to make sure that uh you balance your fear of missing out and burning out you don't want to like go crazy like in terms of reading everything because then you don't have time for anything else and at the same time you want to maybe read a little bit so you are up to date with things so um like as a personal anecdote i was like uh for the machine learning category on archive one of the moderators a few years ago for like a couple of years and so what we do there is so in archive you submit a paper and then you nowadays you can classify which category it belongs to but sometimes people get it wrong so we have a classifier or an lp classifier that uh predicts the correct um categories but it's not always very confident and also it makes mistakes sometimes so the task of the moderators was just to scan through the titles of every submission and make sure okay this is um if it has a computer vision see an answer title it's probably a computer vision paper but sometimes it's more vague and maybe sometimes it's not uh clear maybe the prediction is wrong you you click on the paper you you browse through it and then maybe assign the correct label but yeah at the end of the day you were like looking through all the submissions each day and when i started there were like 100 maybe papers a day in the end uh when like last year or something there were like almost sometimes two or three hundred papers a day if there's a conference maybe sometimes even more and you can't read it all it's like imagine 200 new uh machine learning papers every day and you can maybe read one i honestly i have a hard time even reading one per day because i want to balance my time i have i mean i have my job i have work i have maybe other things like research in the evening i want to learn something so usually i work on my regular job but then in the evening if time permits i do some of my research i do some learning like either i read a book and stuff so there's only so much time you have right so a paper reading a paper takes me it depends if i want to read it really thoroughly for review many hours but let's say if i skim through it it's half an hour to an hour to get like everything in a way that makes like say it makes sense you don't read it like super carefully but you read it reasonably carefully so half an hour an hour and um this can be a lot i mean if you have other things to do so you want to be careful uh picking like you said papers that are worthwhile reading so what i do is actually um i when i find interesting titles i i have like a notebook basically where i keep all i have categories i have a category like activation function let's say gradient boosting um i don't know like interpretable machine learning model evaluation i have these different categories and if i find something interesting a blog post or an article i usually put them there and i just put them there so i know okay i can come back to it um later but i don't start reading right away because then you get really it's infinite you have to be really careful with your time basically and then what i do is i do a weekly review every week uh usually i do the sunday night and there i go through my list and i i have for the week a task read two papers not more i mean sometimes it depends but this is my minimum goal sometimes i read more there are actually weeks where i don't even read two papers but i go through my list and which are the most worthwhile papers i should read and then i pick it like based on time so what i'm trying to say is maybe i would say see how much time you have maybe you have time for one paper a day um but don't basically approach it from how much time you have and then fit the papers in rather than how many papers there are and then trying to make time to just read all the papers because um yeah i mean this is it's a trade-off in an ideal world i wish i could read all the papers but you have to make trade-offs right so it's like um paper reading is important uh especially if you are working on a paper there are sometimes weeks where i read let's say 10 papers a day because i have to write the related work section or something but um most of the time i think um i mean i would try to to read papers as much as you can but yeah you want to also create i think creating knowledge is almost as important i mean you need to to learn in order to create but i almost try to spend as much time creating as i can and then also absorbing knowledge but see also the methods or techniques that are really worthwhile they will make it into a textbook one day so you don't there's a lot of even the you think the papers are important that you're reading but i think maybe only five out of 100 papers that you're reading really have a long lasting impact too so in that case yeah it is it is uh worthwhile reading papers but i would say it's almost a better bang for the buck if you read uh textbooks so because someone curated the list of papers for you of course it's always a few years behind but um yeah it is it is a trade-off right i mean balancing your time there's no right or wrong really but yeah i'm just thinking yeah you can spend too much time on papers i would be i would be selective not spending the whole time the whole day on it basically but yeah it's tricky because there's so much cool stuff out there so yeah definitely definitely i i love that um but yeah i think these are the sort of questions i had i think we are fairly like i'm fairly hogging your time over here but uh yeah these are the set of questions i have mostly for people who are listening to this podcast i'll be leaving your a lot of handles i think you have a very interesting blog on your website so i'll be leaving that link over here your twitter where i think i personally have um enjoyed your tweets like i think you have a very nice summaries like at least for the at least in the last few few months i have seen like you have you have this very two-line thing that you share your opinions about and it helps at least for people like us to filter out okay if if this person is saying maybe i should at least check out what uh what this uh paper or at least what this article is about so yeah i'll leave your twitter over here so for people who want to get interested um but apart from that thanks thanks a lot i think this conversation was great i really had some very nice uh insights uh at least getting started and people like most of the people who are listening to this podcast are getting started into the research world they are exploring and they are primarily interested uh what lies ahead for them in the field so i think uh you as a person and also your resources with your books uh it would be a perfect fit so yeah thanks thanks a lot for being on the podcast and thanks for uh writing the books i think no for us it's really critical to have these kind of uh resources cool cool yeah thanks so much for the invitation i think we had a great time chatting about things uh i liked really your questions it was uh really like these questions that made me think uh but then i think hopefully give useful answers i don't know you will or the community will tell me but it was fun i like chatting about these things and yeah that's the thing also when i'm teaching um i always tend to go on tangents so i don't mind ask me anything i will happily chat about it whether it's useful or not um i don't know but if you tell me it was good so i i hope uh it was it was at least fun let's say it like that so i had a good time and maybe yeah maybe we can do this again in a in the future if i mean because you probably have more questions than you already asked yeah but yeah yeah definitely i i didn't miss out on few of the con uh questions definitely uh just to keep a track of time but yeah i'll definitely love to have you once more so yeah yeah but thanks thanks a lot for having being here all right cool then yeah have a great rest of the day and yeah have fun learning and good luck with your research too [Music] you

