## The Dangerous Illusion of AI Coding? - Jeremy Howard

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dHBEQ-Ryo24

It it it literally [music] disgusts me. Like I literally think it's it's inhumane. My mission remains the same as it has been for like 20 years, which is to stop people working like this. >> Jeremy Howard, a deep learning pioneer, a Kaggle grandmaster. >> [music] >> He is a huge advocate for actually understanding what we are building through [music] an interactive loop, a notebook, a ripple, the act of poking at a problem until [music] it pushes back. He argues this is where the real insight happens. And the funny thing is they're both right. LLM's [music] cosplay understanding things. They pretend to understand things. No one's actually creating 50 times [music] more high-quality software than they were before. Um, so we've actually just done a study of this and [music] there's a tiny uptick tiny uptick in what people are actually shipping. The thing about AI based coding [music] is that it's like a slot machine in that you you have an illusion of control. you know, you could get to craft your prompt and your list of MCPs and your skills and whatever and then but in the end you pull the lever, right? Here's a piece of code that no one understands. >> Yeah. >> And [music] am I going to bet my company's product on it? And I the answer is I don't know because like I I don't I don't like I don't know what to do now because no one's like been in this situation. They're they're really bad at software [music] engineering. Uh and then I think that's possibly always going to be true. The idea that a human can do a lot more with a computer when the human can like manipulate the objects [music] in inside that computer in real time and study them and move them around and combine them together. Whoever you listen to, you know, whether it be Feainman or whatever, like you you always hear from the great scientists, how they build deeper intuition by by building mental models which they get over time by interacting [music] with the things that they're learning about. A machine could kind of build an effective hierarchy of abstractions about what the world is and how it works entirely through looking at the statistical correlations of a huge corpus of text using a deep learning model. That was my premise. This video is brought to you by Nvidia GTC. It's running March the 16th until the 19th in San Jose and streaming [music] free online. The key topics this year are agentic AI and reasoning, high performance inference and training, open models, and physical AI and robotics. I'm so excited about the DJX Spark. I've been on the waiting list [music] for over a year now. It's a personal superco computer that is about the size of a Mac Mini. It's the perfect adornment to a MacBook [music] Pro, by the way. And you can fine-tune a 70 billion parameter language model with one of these things. And I'm giving one away for free. All you have to do is sign up to the conference and attend one of the sessions using the link in the description. [music] As for the sessions, I'm interested in attending Ammon Sang's talk. So, he's the CTO of Cursor and his [music] session is code with context. Build an agentic IDE that truly understands your codebase. Now, obviously, Jensen's keynote is on March the 16th. He said he's going to unveil a new chip that will surprise the [music] world. Their next generation architecture, Vera Rubin, is already in full production. And there's speculation we might even get an early glimpse of their new Fineman architecture. So don't forget folks, the link is in the description. [music] If you're attending virtually, it's completely free. Don't miss it. Jeremy Howard, welcome to MLST. >> I mean, welcome to my home. Thanks for coming. >> Yeah. Well, where are we now? >> We are in beautiful Morton Bay in southeast Queensland. We are by the sea um in my backyard. >> The weather didn't disappoint. >> It certainly didn't. It doesn't often, but if you were here yesterday, it would have been very different. [laughter] >> Well, I don't know where to start. So, I've been I've been a huge fan probably since about 2017 18. Of course, you had the famous ulm fit paper. And uh when I was at Microsoft, I remember doing a presentation about that because it was actually I mean now we take it for granted that we fine-tune language models on a corpus of text and then we kind of like continue to train them and specialize them. But apparently this was not received wisdom. >> No, this was the first time it happened. Yeah, kind of the first or second. Uh, so Quarkley and Andrew Dy had done something a few years ago, but they had missed the key point, which is the thing you pre-train on has to be a general purpose corpus. >> So, no one quite realized this key thing. And maybe I had a bit of fortune here that my background was in philosophy and cognitive science. And so, I'd spent some decades thinking about this. >> The technical architecture of of ULM fit. Just just sketch that out. >> I'm a huge fan of regularization. And I'm a huge fan of taking a model that's incredibly flexible and then making it more constrained not by decreasing the size of the architecture by but by adding regularization. So even that at the time was extremely controversial. Uh but that was by no means a unique insight of of ours. So what Steven Merid had done is he taken the extreme flexibility of an LS LSTM a kind of ver classic stateful recurrent neural net towards which things are kind of gradually heading back towards nowadays and it added five different types of regularization. He added every type of regularization you can imagine. And then um that was my starting point was to say okay I now have a massively flexible deep learning model that can be as powerful as I want it to be and it can also be as constrained as I need it to be. And then I needed a really big corpus of text. Funnily enough, this is also Steven. He had been at Common Crawl and uh I think he helped or made the uh Wikipedia data set. And then I realized actually the Wikipedia data set made lots of assumptions. It had all these like unk for unknown words because it all assumed classic NLP approaches. So I redid the whole thing, created a new Wikipedia data set and that was my general corpus and then I used a WDLSTM trained it. So it was actually overnight. So for eight hours on a gaming GPU, you know, um because I was at the University of San Francisco, we didn't have heaps of resources. Um probably like a 2080 Ti or something, I suspect. Um and then the then next morning when I woke up, I then it's the same three-stage architecture that we do today, you know, pre-training, mid-training, post-training. So then I figured, okay, I've now that I've trained something to predict the next word of Wikipedia, it must know a lot about the world. I then figured if I then fine-tune it on a corpus specific, so what we could now call supervised fine-tuning um data set, which in this case was a data set of movie reviews, it would becomes especially good at predicting the next word of those. So it would learn a lot about movies. uh did that for like an hour and then like a few minutes of fine-tuning the downstream classifier which was a classic academic uh data set kind of considered the hardest one which was to take like 5,000word movie reviews and to say like was this a positive or negative sentiment which today is considered easy but at that time you know the only things that did it quite well were highly specialized models that people wrote their whole PhDs on I beat all of their results, you know, 5 minutes later when it fine-tuning that that model. It was uh amazing. >> And the other interesting thing is this kind of um methodology around how you do the finetuning. >> Yeah. So the how we do the finetuning was something we had developed at fast AI. So this is kind of year one of fast AI. So this is still in our very early days. And one of the extremely controversial things we did was we felt that we should focus on fine-tuning existing models because we thought fine-tuning was important. Uh some other folks were doing work contemporaneously with that. So um Jason Nusinski did some really great uh research I think it's during his PhD on how to fine-tune models and how good they can be and some other folks in the in the computer vision world. we were, you know, amongst the first. There's a bunch of us kind of really investing in fine-tuning. And so, yeah, we we felt that using a single learning rate to fine-tune the whole thing all at once made no sense because the different layers have different behaviors. And this is one of the things Jason Yusinsk's research also showed. We developed this idea of like, well, it's also way faster if you just train the last layer, right? because it only has to backrop the last layer and then once that's pretty good backrop the ne the last two and then the last three and then we use something called discriminative learning rates. So different layers we would give different learning rates to and then another critical insight that no one realized for years even though we had told everybody was that you actually have to fine-tune every batch norm. So all the normalization layers you do actually have to fine-tune because that's moving the whole thing up and down or changing its scale. So yeah, when you do that, you can often just fine-tune the last layer or two. And we found that actually with ulm fit uh although we did end up unfreezing all the layers, only the last two were really needed to get the close to state-of-the-art result. So it like took like seconds. >> Yeah. Because the discriminative learning rate thing is interesting because I I think the received wisdom at the time was when you fine-tune a model, if the learning rate is too high, you kind of blow out the representations. So I guess the wisdom was if if you don't have a really low learning rate, you'll just destroy the representations. >> I mean, there was no received wisdom because nobody talked about it. No one cared, you know. It was just this to like nearly no one cared. Transfer learning was just not something anybody thought about. And Rachel and I felt like it matters more than anything, you know, because only one person has to train a really big model once and then the rest of us can all fine-tune it. Um, so we thought we just should learn how to do that really well. So we um spent a lot of time just trying lots of things, but in the end the intuition was pretty straightforward and what intuitively seemed like it ought to work basically always did work. Which is another big difference between how people still today tend to do ML research is they think it's all about ablations and you can't make any assumptions or guesses. And it's not at all true. I find nearly everything that I expect to work almost always works first time because I spend a lot of time building up that those intuitions that kind of understanding of how gradients behave. >> I I think there's a dichotomy though between continual learning which is when we want to keep training the thing but maintain generality versus fine-tuning a thing to do something specific. that there's always been this idea that yes, you can make a model specific, you can bend it to your will, but you lose generality and you kind of degrade the representation. So tell me about that. >> Yeah, there's some truth in that, although not as much as you might think. On the whole, the big problem is that people don't actually look at their activations and don't actually look at their gradients. So something we do in our software in our fast AR software is we have built into it this ability to to see in a glance what your entire network looks like. And once you've done it a few times it just takes a couple of hours to learn you can immediately see oh I see this is overtrained or undertrained or at this layer that something went wrong. It's not a mystery you know. So basically what happens is for example you end up with with dead neurons that go to a point where they they've got zero gradient regardless of what you do with them. Um that often happens if they get head off towards infinity. You can always fix that. So yeah it's it's not as bad as people think by any means. something that trains well for continuous learning when done properly can also be done well to train well for a particular task if you're careful in a sense you do want the neurons to die and I'll explain what what I mean by this like we want to bend the behavior of models to introduce implicit constraints because without constraints there is no creativity there is no reasoning and and so on and so forth so so in a sense you actually want it to say, "Don't do that. You want it to do something else." >> I don't think of it that way. Like to me, it's more like I find thinking about humans extremely helpful when it comes to thinking about AI. I find they behave more similarly than differently. Um, and my intuition about each tends to work quite well. You know, with a human, when you learn something new, it's not about unlearning something else. And so something I always found is when I got models to try to learn to do two somewhat similar tasks, they almost always got better at both of them than one that only learned one of them. >> Um I was reminded a little bit of um you know the Dino paper from Lun. So this whole kind of um regime of self-s supervised learning with with um I mean that that was that was a vision model but the you know the idea was okay so we're doing pre-training and we want to maintain as much diversity and fidelity as possible so that when we do the downstream task we can kind of we've got more things that we can latch on. >> Yeah. Yeah. And um you know semi-supervised and self-supervised learning was such an unappreciated area and yeah Jan Lun was absolutely one of the guys who was also working on it. >> I actually did a post because I was so annoyed at how few people cared about semi-supervised learning. I did a whole post about it years ago. Yan Lukun looked at it for me as well and you know suggested a few other pieces of work that I I had missed and um but I was kind of surprised at how well you know how incredibly useful it is to basically say like basically come up with a pretext task right so in vision so we did this in vision before ulm fit so it was like in medical imaging you know p take a a a hisytologology slide and predict you know, mask out a few squares and predict what used to be there. So, some of my students at USF I had doing stuff with that. It was basically entirely taking stuff that we and others had already done in vision. >> Yeah. >> So, like this idea of masking out squares, we didn't invent it. Masking out words was the obvious thing, you know, and this idea of um gradually unfreezing layers we had done before in computer vision. The whole idea of starting with a pre-trained model that was general purpose had been in computer vision. There was a really classic paper actually in computer vision in might have been around 2015 was entirely an empirical paper saying look what happens when we take a pre-trained imageet model predicting what sculptor created this sculpture or predicting what architecture style this is and like in every task it got the state-of-the-art result. And it really surprised me. People didn't look at that and think like, I bet that ought to work in every other area as well, whether it be genome sequences or language or whatever. But people have a bit of a lack of imagination. I find they tend to assume things only work in one particular field. Um, that's really true. >> Yeah. I mean, I guess there's two things there. I mean, first of all, we were kind of hinting at this notion of almost Goodart's law or the shortcut rule that you get exactly what you optimize for at the cost of everything else. But that doesn't seem to be the case because we can you know optimize for perplexity in the case of language models and as you say what seems to happen is we're getting into the distributional hypothesis here a little bit. So you know you you know the word by the company it keeps. So when we have an incredible amount of associative data it might be master auto prediction or any of these things like that. The model seems to build something that we might call an understanding like >> or I have always thought of it as a hierarchy of of abstractions. you know, it it it needs if it's going to predict, you know, if the if the document is here was the, you know, opening that uh, you know, that um, Bobby Fisher used and it has chess notation to predict the next thing, it needs to know something about chess notation or at least openings. Um if it's like uh you know and this was vetoed by the 1956 US president, you need to know like you don't even you don't just need to know who the president was but the idea that there are presidents and therefore that the idea that there are leaders and therefore the idea that there are groups of people who have hierarchies and therefore that there are people and therefore that there are objects and like you can't predict the next word of a sentence well without knowing all of these things. So that knowing uh my hypothesis for why I created ULM ffit is to say it would end to to to compress that as well as possible to get that knowledge, it would have to create these abstractions, these hierarchies of abstractions somewhere deep inside its model. Otherwise, how could it possibly do a good job of predicting the next word, you And because um deep learning models are universal learning machines, you know, and we had a universal way to train them, I figured if if we get the data right and if the hardware is good enough, then [music] in theory, we ought to be able to build that next word predicting [music] machine, which ought to implicitly build a hierarchical structural understanding of the things that are being described by the text that it is learning to predict. >> I think that they can know in quite a, you know, they know in quite a superficial way. So there's a myriad of surface statistical relationships and they generalize extraordinarily well. It's it's miraculous. >> It is. >> But the thing is I want to contrast this with other comments you've made about creativity. So I I I think knowledge is about constraints and I think creativity is the evolution of knowledge, respecting those constraints. Therefore, AI is not creative. And and you've said the same thing. You've said AI isn't creative. So like on the one hand, how can you say that they know and not think that they can be created? >> I mean, I don't think I've used that exact expression. You know, I know actually I remember chatting with Peter Norvig on camera and both of us said, well, actually, they kind of are creative like we just got to be a bit careful about our choices of words, I guess. So um you know Peter Wnjak who's a guy I really really respect who kind of rediscovered space repetitive learning built the super memo system and is the modern-day guru of memory. The entire reason he's based his life around remembering things is because he believes that creativity comes from having a lot of stuff remembered which is to say putting together stuff you've remembered in interesting ways is a great way to be creative. LLMs are actually quite good at that, but there's a kind of creativity they're not at all good at, which is, you know, moving outside the distribution. So, >> uh, which I think is where you're heading with your question. Um, but I'm just kind of I'm framing it this way to say you have to be so nuanced about this stuff because if you say like they're not creative, it gives you the can give you the wrong idea because they can do very creative seeming things. But if it's like well can they really extrapolate outside the training distribution the answer is no they can't >> but the training distribution is so big and the number of ways to interpolate between them is so vast we don't really know yet what the limitations of that is but I see it every day you know because I my my work is R&D I'm constantly on the edge of and outside the training data. I'm doing things that haven't been done before. And there's this weird thing, I don't know if you've ever seen it before. I see it, but I see it multiple times every day where the LM goes from being incredibly clever to like worse than stupid like like not understanding the most basic fundamental premises about how the world works. >> Yeah. >> And it's like, oh, whoops. I fell outside the training data distribution. It's gone dumb. And then like there's no point having that discussion any further [laughter] because >> yes, >> you know, you've lost it at that point. >> Yes. I mean I I love um you know Margaret Bowden, she had this kind of hierarchy of creativity. So there's like combinatorial, exploratory and um and transformative and the models can certainly do combinatorial creativity but for me it's all about constraints. So that I mean this is what Bowden said and even Leonardo da Vinci he said that creativity is all about constraints and and you've spoken about you know we'll talk about this dialogue engineering but what happens is when when we talk with language models it's a specification acquisition problem. So we go back and forth and actually when we think the process of intelligence is about building this imaginary Lego block in our mind and respecting various constraints and when you respect those constraints and you just continue to evolve then those things are said to be creative. So language models when you add constraints to them so this could be via supervision via critics via verifiers then they are creative and and we alpha evolve we've seen many examples of this but the illusion is on their own sans constraints obviously they have this behavioral shaping stuff that we're talking about they don't have hard constraints and that's why they can't go outside their distribution I mean I think they can't go outside their distribution because it's just something that a um that type of mathematical model can't do you know I It can do it, but it won't do it well. You know, when you look at the kind of 2D case of of fitting a curve to data, once you go outside the area that the data covers, the curves disappear off into space in wild directions, you know, and that's all we're doing. But we're doing it in multiple dimensions. You know, I think Bowden might be pretty shocked at how far compositional creativity can go when you can compose the entirety of the human knowledge corpus. Um, and I think this is where people often get confused because it's like, so for example, I was talking to Chris Latner yesterday about uh how Claude uh Anthropic, you know, had had got Claude to write a C compiler and they were like, "Oh, this is a clean room C compiler. You can tell it's clean room because it was created in Rust, you know, and um so Chris created the kind of you know, I guess it's probably the top most widely used C C++ compiler nowadays playing on top of LLVM, which is the most widely used kind of foundation for compilers. Um, they were like, "Oh, well, Chris didn't use Rust. This is, you know, and we didn't give it access to any compiler source code, so it's a clean room implementation." But that misunderstands how LLMs work, right? which is all of Chris's work was in the training data many many times LLVM is used widely and lots and lots of things are built on it um including lots of C and C++ compilers converting it converting it to Rust is an interpolation between parts of the training data you know it's a style transfer problem um so it's definitely compositional creativity at most if you can call it creative at all and you actually see it when you look at the the repo that it created, it's copied parts of the LL VM code which today Chris says like, "Oh, I made a mistake. I shouldn't have done it that way. Nobody else does it that way." You know, oh wow, look, they're the only other one that did it that way. That doesn't happen accidentally. That happens because you're not actually being creative. you're actually just finding the kind of nonlinear average point in your training data between like Rust things and building compiler things. >> All of that is true. I mean first of all I think we shouldn't underestimate the size of how big this combinatorial creativity is. So all of that is true. So the code is on the internet but also they had a whole bunch of tests which were scaffolded which meant that every single time some code was was committed they could run the test and they and they basically had a critic and they could then do this autonomous feedback loop. So in in a sense it's very similar to the recent research by open AAI and and Gemini where you you're you're trying to solve a problem in math and you already have an evaluation function. The same on the AR prize, right? You have an evaluation function and what people discount is even knowledge of what the evaluation function is is partial knowledge of the problem. So you can then brute force search. You can use the statistical pattern matching, use the verifier as a constraint and you can actually >> and they don't even need to do that, right? like they you literally already know how to pass those tests because there's lots of software that already does it. >> So, it just uses that and translates them to Rust. Like that's that's all it did. Um which is impressive. >> Yeah. >> Um and if you I'm much less familiar with math than I am computer science, but from talking to mathematicians, they tell me that that's also what's happening with like Erdos problems and stuff. It's some of them are newly solved. >> Yeah. [snorts] >> Um but they are not sparks of insight. You know, they're solving ones that you can solve by meshing up together very closely related things that humans have already figured out. >> So on the subject of Claude code, now I know you've spoken extensively about vibe coding. Um actually Rachel had some interesting work out. I mean she she quoted the the meter study which showed that productivity actually went down when people were vibe coding but I think >> and they thought that they went up which is the most interesting >> and then also there was the anthropic study I mean you know maybe we should rewind a little bit I mean Dario had this essay out the other day uh I think it was called the adolescence of technology or something like that and and he was basically saying look you know um we have all of these amazing software engineers at anthropic and they are just so productive and he was extrapolating to the average software engineer so there's going to be mass unemployment because soon we're going to be able to automate all of this with AI. >> I mean, it it doesn't make any sense. Um Elon Musk said something a bit similar a few days ago saying like, "Oh, LM will just spit out the machine code directly. We won't need libraries, programming languages." >> Yeah. >> Um yeah, look, the thing is none of these guys have have been software engineers recently. I'm not sure Dario's ever been a software engineer at all. Software engineering is a unusual discipline and a lot of people mistake it for being the same as typing code into an IDE. Coding is another one of these style transfer problems. You you take a specification of the problem to solve and you can use your compositional creativity to find the parts of the training data which interpolated between them solve that problem and interpolate that with syntax of the target language and you get code. There's a very famous essay by Fred Brooks written many decades ago um no silver bullet and which it almost sounded like he was talking about today it it he was specifically saying something he was responding to something very similar which is in those days it was all like oh what about all these new fourth generation languages and stuff like that you know we're not going to need any coders anymore any software engineers anymore because software is now so easy to write anybody can write it Um, and he said, well, he guessed that you could get at maximum a 30% improvement. He specifically said a 30% improvement in the next decade, but I don't think he needed to limit it that much because the vast majority of work in software engineering isn't typing in the code. >> Yeah. Um, so in some sense parts of what Dario said were right, just like for quite a few people now most of their code is being typed by a language model. Um, that's true for me. Uh, say like maybe 90%. Um, but it hasn't made me that much more productive. um because that was never the slow bit. It's also helped me with kind of the research a lot and figuring out, you know, which files are going to be touched. But anytime I've made any attempt at getting an LLM to like design a solution to something that hasn't been designed lots of times before, [snorts] it's it's horrible because what it actually every time gives me is the design of something that looks on its surface a bit similar. And often that's going to be an absolute disaster because things that look on their surface a bit similar and like I'm literally trying to create something new to get away from the similar thing. It's very misleading. First of all, I'm I'm exasperated by what I see as the tech bro predilction to misunderstand cognitive science and philosophy and what not because we we've spoken to so many really interesting people on MLST like for example Cesar Hadalgo he wrote this book the laws of knowledge and and even Marva Chirama she's a a philosopher of neuroscience and she was talking all about you know like you know basically that knowledge is protein so yeah I I think that that knowledge is perspectival I don't think that knowledge can be this abstract perspective free thing that can exist on Wikipedia and um I also think that knowledge is is embodied and it's alive. It's it's something that exists in in us and the purpose of an organization is to preserve and evolve knowledge. So when you start delegating cognitive tasks to language models, you actually have this weird paradoxical effect that you erode the knowledge inside the organization. >> Well, that's true and that's terrifying. There's often this these arguments online >> between people who are like, "LMs don't understand anything. They're just pretending to understand." >> And then other people are like, "Don't be ridiculous. Look what this LLM just did for me." Right? And the funny thing is they're both right. LLM's cosplay understanding things. They pretend to understand things. And this was the interesting thing about the early kind of uh work with like uh cognitive science work with like Daniel Dennett. Um that's basically what the Chinese room experiment is, right? Is you've got a guy in a room who can't speak Chinese at all, but he sure looks like he does because you can feed in questions and he gives you back answers, but all he's actually doing is looking up things in a huge array of books or machines or whatever. The difference between pretending to be intelligent and actually being intelligent is entirely unimportant as long as you're in the region in which the pretense is actually effective, you know. So, so it's actually fine for a great many tasks that LLMs only pretend to be intelligent because for all intents and purposes, it it it just doesn't matter until you get to the point where it can't pretend anymore. And then you realize like oh my god this thing's so stupid. >> I'm a fan of so by the way. So you know he said that um you know understanding is causally reducible but ontologically irreducible and he was saying there was a phenomenal component to understanding but you don't even need to go there. Like the interesting thing about knowledge being protein is this idea that the you know it's basically this canon idea the world is a complex place. None of us understand it. It's like the blind men and the elephant. We all have different perspectives. It's very complex thing. And so we we all we all do this kind of modeling. But the interesting thing is that the language models sometimes they seem to understand and they understand because the supervisor places them in a frame. So inside that frame, so when you have that perspective of the elephants, they're actually surprisingly coherent, but we discount the supervisor placing the models in that frame. >> Yeah. Yeah. So that so C cell versus Dennit or is it versus cell and Dennut was what everybody was talking about when I back when I was doing my undergrad in philosophy you know so I think consciousness explained came out about then probably Chinese room a little bit before um it's interesting because the discussions were the same discussions we're having now but they've gone from being abstract discussions to being real discussions it's helpful if people go back to the abstract discussions because that it's it it helps you get out of your you know it's very distracting at the moment to look at something that's cosplaying intelligence so well and go back to the fundamental question. Um, so anyway, I just wanted to mention that's kind of it's it's this interesting situation we're now in where it's very easy to really get the wrong idea about what AI can do. Um, particularly when you don't understand the difference between coding and software engineering. >> Yeah. Which then takes me to your point or your question about the implications of that for organizations. >> Yeah. >> You know, a lot of organizations are basically betting their futures on a speculative premise which is that AI is going to be able to do everything better than humans uh or at least everything in coding better than humans. I I worry about this a lot both for the organizations and for the humans. You know, for the humans when you're not actively using your design and engineering and coding muscles, you don't grow. You might even wither, but you at least don't grow. And you know, speaking of the CEO of an R&D startup, you know, if my staff aren't growing, then we're going to fail. You know, uh that we can't let that happen. and getting better at the particular prompting skills whatever details of the current generation of AI CLI frameworks isn't growing you know that's that's like that's as helpful as learning about the details of some AWS API when you don't actually understand how the internet works you know it's not it's not reusable knowledge it's ephemeral knowledge So like if you wanted to, you can actually use it as a learning superpower, but also it can do the opposite. You know, the natural thing it's going to do is remove your confidence over time. >> I agree that that's the natural thing. So and this is especially pertinent for you because your your career has been around basically educating people to get, you know, technology and AI literacy. So the default behavior is very similar to a self-driving car that you know there's this tipping point where at some point you're not engaged anymore. You're not paying attention and you get this delegation of competence and you get understanding debt. That's the default thing. So this study from anthropic a couple of weeks ago, it it contradicted Dario completely because it even said that yeah, there were a few people in the study that were asking conceptual questions that are actually kind of, you know, keeping on top of things and they had a gradient of learning, but most people didn't. And my hypothesis about that is, you know, the ideal situation for Gen AI coding is that like us, we've been writing software for decades. We already have this abstract understanding. We're using it in domains that we know well and we can specify, we can remove loads of ambiguity. we can track and we can go back and forth and we can we can stay in touch with the process. But what happens is that the the default attractor is for people to just go into this autopilot mode and they've got no idea what's happening and it's actually making them dumber. >> Uh I I created a the first deep learning for medicine company called Denalytic back in what was that like 2014. Um, and our initial focus was on radiology and a lot of people were worried that this would cause radiologists to become less effective at radiology. >> Yeah. >> And I strongly felt the opposite, which is, and I did quite a bit of research into this of like what happens when there's like fly by wire in airplanes or anti-lock brakes in cars or whatever. If you can successfully automate parts of a task that really are automatable, you can allow the the expert to focus on the things that they need to focus on. And we saw this happen. So in radiology, we found if we could automate identifying the possible nodules in a lung CT scan, we were actually good at it, which we were. And then we the the radiologist then can focus on looking at the nodules and trying to decide if they're malignant or what to do about it. So again, it's one of these subtle things. So if there's things which you can fully automate effectively in a way that you can remove that cognitive burden from a human so that they can focus on things that they need to focus on. That can be good. You know, I don't know where we sit in software development because, you know, I've been coding for 40ish years. So, I've written a lot of code and I can glance at a screen of code and, you know, unless it's something quite weird or sophisticated, I can immediately tell you what it does and whether it works and whatever. Um, I can kind of see intuitively things that could be improved, you know, possible things to be careful of. I'm not sure I could have got to that point if I hadn't have written a lot of code. So the people I'm finding who can really benefit from AI right now are either really junior people who can't code at all who can now write some apps that they have in their head and as long as they work reasonably quickly um with the current AI capabilities then they're happy and then really experienced people like like me or like Chris Latner because we can basically have it do some of our typing for us, you know, and some of our research for us. People in the middle, which is most people most of the time, it really worries me because how do you get from point A to point B? >> Yeah. >> Without typing code, it might be possible, but we don't have a we have no experience of that. We don't is is it possible? How would you do it? Like is it kind of like going back to school where at primary school we don't let kids use calculators so that they develop their number muscle? Do we need to do that for like first five years as a developer? You have to write all the code yourself. I don't know. But if I was an between like two and 20 years of experience developer, I would be asking that question of myself a lot because otherwise you might be in the process of making yourself obsolete. >> Yeah. Well, this is another thing about knowledge that um this Cesa Hadalgo guy said. So he said that knowledge is nonfgeible and which means it can't be exchanged. So what he means by that is the process of learning is in some important sense not reducible right so you have to have the experience and the experience has to have friction and when we build models of the world we actually learn like you know there's this phrase reality pushes back so we make lots of mistakes and we update our models and we and we're just placing these coherence constraints in in our in our model and that's how we come to learn. So you use claw code and there's so little friction in the process. That's exactly what this study from anthropic said. It said there was so little friction they didn't learn anything >> right. Yeah. No, exactly. Um desirable difficulty is the concept that kind of comes up in education. But even going back to the work of uh Ebinghouse who was the original repetitive spaced learning guy in the 19th century and then Peter Wnjak more recently it's we find the same like we we we know that memories don't get formed unless it is hard work to form them. Uh so you know that's where you kind of get this somewhat um surprising result that says uh revising too often is a bad idea because it comes to mind too quickly. And so with repetitive space learning with stuff like Anki and Super Memo, the algorithm tries to schedule the flash cards at a just before the moment you're about to forget. So then it's hard work. So I I studied uh Chinese for 10 years um in order to try to learn about learning myself. Um and I really noticed this that I used Anki and because it was always scheduling my cards just before I was about to forget them. It was always incredibly hard work. >> Yeah. >> You know to do reviews because almost all the cards were ones I was on the verge of forgetting. It was absolutely exhausting. But my god, it worked well. Here I am. I don't really haven't done any study for 15 plus years and I still remember my Chinese. >> Well, I know I mean also I mean coming back to your radiology example um like one example people give is call centers. So you know we have this notion that in an organization we have high intelligence roles and low intelligence roles and for me intelligence is just the adaptive acquisition and synthesis of of knowledge. So we assume that that you know the low intelligence roles doing the call center stuff um it's it doesn't adapt which means we can you know there are certain things that an organization does that do not change so we could automate them and we don't need to update our knowledge and I think that discounts actually maybe with the radiology example that having this holistic knowledge like you know in a call center there are so many weird edge cases that come in so many weird things happen and that filters up in the organization and we adapt over time so when you start to automate things and you actually lose the competence to create the process which created the thing in the in the first place and you lose the evolvability of that knowledge in the organization, you're actually kind of cutting your legs off. >> Yeah, absolutely. And um so I you know all I know is in in my company I just I tell our our staff all the time almost the only thing I care about is how much your your personal human capabilities are growing. you know, I don't actually care how many PRs you're doing, um, how many features you're doing. Like, uh, there's that nice, um, you know, John Oster, the T TCL guy, recently released some of his st the his Stanford Friday takeaway lectures and he has this nice one called um, a little bit of slope makes up for a lot of intercept. Uh just basically the idea that that you know in your life if you can focus on doing things that cause you to grow faster. >> Yeah. >> It's way better than focusing on focusing on the things that you're already good at. You know that has that high intercept. >> So the only thing I really care about and I think is the only thing that matters for for my company is that my team I'm focusing on their slope. >> Yeah. If you focus on just driving out results at the limit of whatever AI can do right now, you're only caring about the intercept, you know. So, I think it's basically a path to obsolescence through a company and the people who are in it. And so, I'm really surprised how many executives of big companies are pushing this now because it feels like if they're wrong, which they probably are, and they have nowhere to tell if they are because this is an area they're not at all familiar with. if they never learned it in their MBAs. They're basically setting up their companies to be destroyed. >> Yeah. >> And really surprised that, you know, shareholders would let them do that. You know, set up such an incredibly speculative action. Yeah. Here we are. It feels like a lot of companies are are going to fail as a result of the uh amassed tech debt that causes them to not be able to maintain or build their products anymore. There are loads of folks out there like France relate like he he he really gets it. He he understands this and you know so he's always said that it's it's about this kind of mmetic sharing of cognitive models about the domain and how we refine it together on the sharing thing. This is another big scaling problem with Gen AI coding, right? So the the the the ideal case, I've done this. I know a domain really well and I can specify it with exquisite detail and I tell claude code, go and do this thing and the models in my mind doesn't matter. Um and then you go into an organization and now I need to share like my knowledge with all of the other people, right? And I'm sure you have this in your company as well. Like you need to that this knowledge acquisition bottleneck is a real serious problem in in organizations. So when it's just me, I I I think I'm probably about 50 times more productive using claude code. It's absolutely magic and I can see why people are so excited about it. But people don't seem to understand the bottleneck and and how that doesn't really translate to many real world organization. >> No one's actually creating 50 times more highquality software than they were before. So, we've actually just done a study of this and there's a tiny uptick tiny uptick in what people are actually shipping. That's the facts. Obviously, I'm an enthusiast of of AI and what it can do, but also my wife Rachel recently pointed out in an article, all of the pieces that make gambling addictive are present in >> Yeah. dark flow. >> I was going to bring that up. You have to tell us about >> coding. >> Yeah, >> it's this really awkward situation where it's very almost everybody I know who got very enthusiastic about AI powered coding in recent months have totally changed their mind about it when they finally went back and looked at like how much stuff that I built during those days of great enthusiasm am I using today? Are my customers using today? am I making money from today? Almost all the money is being made by influencers, you know, or by the companies that produce the tokens. The thing about AI based coding is that it's like a slot machine in that you you have an illusion of control. You know, you can get to craft your prompt and your list of MCPs and your skills and whatever. And then but in the end, you pull the lever, right? You put in the prompt and something comes back and it's like cherry cherry. It's like oh next time I'll change my prompt a bit. I'll add a bit more context. Pull the lever again. Pull the lever again. It's the stochastic thing. You get the occasional win that's like, "Oh, I won. I got a feature." So, it's got it's got all these hallmarks of like loss disguised as a win. um somewhat stochcastic uh feeling of control, all the stuff that um gaming companies try to engineer into their gaming rooms. Now, none of that means that AI is not useful, but gosh, it's hard to tell. >> I know. And and Rachel, just just to be clear to she also said that one of the hallmarks of gambling is that you kind of delude yourself that you have some awareness of what's going on, but but actually you don't. But let let's do the bull case a little bit, though. So because I do I do think in restricted cases it it is it is very useful and these are cases where we understand and and we can place constraints and specification but um even in those cases you could argue on the one hand that we're not you know we're not going to be unemployed anytime soon because you just do more work on the addiction thing I've noticed that so I've had 14-hour claude code marathon sessions and and I actually feel addicted to it. It's like a slot machine, you know. It It really is. >> Been there, too. Absolutely. >> Yeah, I know. It's And just I've never felt more drained writing code. I actually need to take a rest afterwards, like a few days rest because it completely >> was crap, you know. Yeah, definitely. I've had some successes, right? And so in fact, we've spent the last couple of years building a whole product based around where we know the successes are going to be, which is when you're working on reasonably small pieces that you can fully understand and that you can design and you can build up your own layers of abstraction to create things that are bigger than the uh parts that you're building out of. had a very interesting situation recently where I just it was kind of an experiment basically which is we uh we rely very heavily on something called um IPI kernel which is the thing that's powers Jupyter notebooks um and there had been a major version release of IPI kernel from 6 to 7 and it stopped working um and it stopped working and both of the products that we were try to use it with one was was called today NB classic which is the original Jupyter notebook book and then it's our own product called Solve It would just randomly crash. Um, an iPel's over 5,000 lines of code. It's very complex code, multiple threads, events, blocks, interfaces with IP, Python, you know, with ZMQ, you know, all kinds of different pieces, um, um, debug pie. and I I couldn't get my head around it and I couldn't see why it was crashing. The tests are all passing. I wonder if AI can solve this. You know, it's like I'm always interested in the question of like how big a chunk can AI handle on its own right now. The answer turned out to be yes. I think it can just it was like so I spent a couple of weeks I didn't develop a lot of understanding about how IPI kernel really worked in the process but I did spend quite a bit of time kind of pulling out separate comp like so the answer was in two hours codeex 5 point I think it was 5.2 two at that time or maybe three had just come out. Couldn't do it. Then if I got the $200 a month uh GPT5.3 Pro >> to fix the problems, it could. And so by rolling back between those two pieces of software, those two models, I could get things working uh over a couple of weeks period. And like you say, it wasn't at all fun. It was very tiring and it felt stressful because I wasn't really in control. But the interesting thing is I now am in a situation where I have the only implementation of an of a Python Jupiter kernel that actually works correctly as far as I can tell with these new version 7 protocol improvements. And now I'm like, well, this is fascinating because we don't have a kind of a a software engineering theory of what to do now. like here's a piece of code that no one understands. >> Yeah. >> Am I going to bet my company's product on it? And I the answer is I don't know because like I I don't I don't like I don't know what to do now because no one's like been in this situation. And like will it does it have memory leaks? Will it still work in a year's time if there's some minor change to the protocol? Is there some weird edge case that's going to destroy everything? No one knows because no one understands his code. It's a really curious situation. I >> mean, first of all, we should acknowledge the penicious erosion of control. So, at the very beginning, you have 10% AI generated code and then you can just see how it creeps up and up and then at some point 6 months down the line a PR comes in and now you know 60% of the code is AI generated and do do you see what you see what happens? you you slowly become disconnected. But the bullcase for this is, you know, in AI there's this idea called functionalism that, you know, we don't care what the intelligent thing is made out of. As long as it does all of the right things, then we know, you know, we would say it's AI. And it's the same thing with software. So the bullcase is I I understand the domain. I don't need to write I don't need to know how to write the quicksort algorithm. I just need to I I just need to understand it, right? [snorts] and then and then you know so I just need to have all of these tests and it needs to go into deployment and these things need to happen and at that point you know what I don't actually care and and I could also >> I quite and I quite to be clear I quite like that um framing but you know what that actually does is it says wow software engineering sure is important then because software engineering is all about finding what those pieces are and how they should behave and then how you can put them together to create a bigger piece and then how you can put them together to create a bigger piece. And if we do that well, then in 10 years time, we could have software that is far more capable than anything we could even imagine today. >> Um, but you're already going to get that with really great software engineering. Yeah, you want to be careful. I think in the end like IPI kernel I'm finding for example, it's just too big a piece, right? Because in the end the the team that made the original IPI kernel were not able to create a set of tests that correctly exercised it and therefore real world downstream projects including the original NB classic you know which is what IPI kernel was extracted from didn't work anymore. So this is this is kind of where our focus is on now on the development side at um at Answeri is finding the right sized pieces and making sure they're the right pieces. Knowing how to recognize what those pieces are and how to design them and how to put them together is actually something that normally requires some decades of experience before you're really good at it. Um certainly it's true for me. Um I reckon I got pretty good at it after maybe 20 years of experience. Yeah, it's a big question is like how do you build these software engineering chops which are now even more important than they've ever been before. They're the difference between somebody who's good at writing computer software and somebody who's not. That feels like a challenging question. >> I know. And there's also this notion that there are so many different ways to abstract and represent something. You know, the world is a very complex place. And maybe the way we've been abstracting and representing software is mostly a reflection of our own cognitive limitations, right? And even in the sciences in in physics, you tend to have a lot of quite reductive methods of modeling the world. And then you've got complexity science, which is just embracing the constructive dissipative, you know, gnarly nature of of things. And I think a lot of software today we don't understand right so for example there are many globally distributed software applications that use the actor pattern and this is just this in it's basically like a complex system right and the only way we can understand it is by doing simulations and tests because no one actually knows how all of these things um fit together so you could argue I guess as a bullc case that maybe we already are doing this at the top of software engineering and that is what we want to do eventually anyway. Yeah, I'd say probably not. You see companies like Instagram and WhatsApp dominate their sectors where whilst having 10 staff and beating companies like Google and Microsoft in the process. I would argue this way of building software in very large companies is actually failing. And I think we're seeing a lot of these very large companies becoming you know increasingly desperate and you know for example the quality of Microsoft Windows and Mac OS has very obviously deteriorated greatly in the last 5 to 10 years. You know, back when Dave Cutler was looking at every line of the NT kernel and making sure it was beautiful, it it was a elegant and marvelous piece of software, you know, and there's I don't think there's anybody in the world who's going to say that Windows 11 is an elegant and marvelous piece of software. So, I actually think we do need to find these smaller components that we do fully understand and that we need to build them up. And here's the problem. Um, AI is no good at that. So, and and so I say that empirically. They're really bad at software engineering. Uh, and then I think that's possibly always going to be true because, you know, we're we're asking them to often move outside of their training data. you know, if we're trying to build something that literally hasn't been built before and do it in a better way than has been done before, we're saying like don't just copy what was in the training data. So, um, and again, this is a confusing point for a lot of people because they see AI being very good at coding and then you think like, oh, that's software engineering, you know, it's like, oh, it's must be good at software engineering. But it's they're different tasks. There's not a huge amount of overlap between them and there's no current empirical data to suggest that LLMs are gaining any competency at software engineering. Every time you look at a piece of software engineering they've done like the browser for example which um cursor created or the C compiler which um anthropic comp created like I've read the source code of those things quite a bit. Um Chris Latner is much more familiar with the compiler example than me. Um but they're they're very very obvious copies of things that already exist. So that's the challenge, you know, is if you want to build something that's not just a copy, then you can't outsource that to an LLM. There's no theoretical to reason to believe that you'll ever be able to and [snorts] there's no empirical data to suggest that you'll ever be able to. >> Yes. I think the punchline of this conversation is and I'm I'm sure you would agree with this that we need to have the combination of AI and humans working together, right? Because the humans provide the the understanding and all of the stuff we were saying about knowledge, but we can still use AI as a tool. We need to we need to design operating models or ways of working that make that you know we we say we we don't want to diminish our competence and understanding right >> so so it's very it's a very fine line >> that's that's been our focus and we both focus on that for teaching and for our own internal development the stuff I've been working on for 20 years has turned out to be the thing that makes this all work should get credit for this was the guy that created the notebook interface. Although also lots of ideas kind of go back to small talk and lisp and APL. But basically the idea that a human can do a lot more with a computer when the human can like manipulate the objects in inside that computer in real time and study them and move them around and combine them together. Yeah, that's what small talk was all about. you know with objects and AP was the same with arrays. Mathematica basically is a superpowered lisp which then also added on this very elegant notebook interface that allowed you to construct kind of a living document out of all this. So I built this thing called NBDEV a few years ago which is a way of creating production software inside these notebook interfaces inside these rich dynamic environments and I found that made me dramatically more um productive as a programmer and like today even though I've never been a full-time programmer as my job when you look at my kind of GitHub repo output I think GitHub produced some statistics about it and I was like just about the most productive programmer in in Australia, you know, like it [snorts] it's working and a lot of the stuff I build has lots and lots of people use it because it's such a rich powerful way to build things. And so it turns out we've now discovered that if you put AI in the same environment with the human again in a in a rich interactive environment AI is much better as well which perhaps isn't shocking to hear but the the normal like if you use clawed code which I know you do and it's a very good piece of software but the environment we give clawed code is very similar to the environment that people had 40 years ago. go, you know, it's a it's a linebased terminal interface. Uh, you know, it can use MCP or whatever. Most of the times it just nowadays uses bash tools, which again very powerful. I love bash tools. I use them all the, you know, CLI tools all the time, but it's still just it's using text files, you know, as its as its interface to the world. It's it's it's really meager. So um so we put the human and the AI inside a Python interpreter. Um and now suddenly you've got the full power power of a very elegant expressive programming language that the human can use to talk to the AI. The AI can talk to the computer. The human can talk to the computer. The computer can talk to the AI. Like you have this really rich thing. And then we let the human and the AI in real time build tools that each other can use. And that's what it's about to me, right? It's about like creating an environment where humans can grow and engage and share. It's like for me when I use solve it, it's the opposite of that experience you described with Claude Code. After a couple of hours, I feel energized and happy and fulfilled. >> I'll give you I'll give you my take. I think that the thing that you're pointing to here is there's something magic about having an interactive stateful environment that gives you feedback. >> And that is because our brains kind of they they can do a a certain you know unit of work. So, so we actually think through refining and testing with reality and that's why I mean I during my PhD I use Mathematica and Mat Lab and I agree so we've got this ripple environment and you know here's the matrix do an image plot you know do a change this is what it looks like now and it's actually a wonderful way to kind of just just refine my mental model about something >> and but but Claude code does a lot of this stuff I I think it's mostly a skill issue I think the people that use Claude code effectively do this I've written a content management system. >> It's possible. It is possible. >> It's possible. Yeah. So, you know, I've written a content management system called Rescript. And when I'm putting together a documentary video, it can go it can it can pull transcripts and then I can verify the claims. And you know, part of AI literacy is just understanding the the asymmetry of language models, right? So, when you give them a sort of discriminative task, they're actually quite good. So if I tell it in a sub agent to go and verify every individual claim, it's much more accurate than if I was in generation mode and I was generating a bunch of claims and the stateful feedback thing again, you know, I can have some kind of like schematized XML dump and I can have like an application here on the side which is visualizing and it's like a feedback loop and for me this is an AI literacy thing like the the good people at AI are already doing this. >> Yeah. So I don't fully agree with you. I agree you can do it in clawed code and I agree it is a AI literacy thing as to whether you can but also claude code was not designed to do this. It's not very good at it and it doesn't make it the natural way of working with it. I don't want to say it's an AI literacy problem because that's like saying like, oh, it's a you problem. To me, if a tool is not making it the natural way for a human to become more knowledgeable, more happy, more connected with a deeper understanding and a deeper connection to what they're working on. That's a tool problem. That that should be how tools are designed to work. So so many models and tools expressly are being evaluated on can I give it a complete piece of work and have it go away and do the whole thing which feels like a huge mistake to me versus have you evaluated whether a human comes out the other end with a deep understanding of a topic you know so that they can really easily build things in the future. I agree with all of that, but then there's the other interesting angle which is that there was a famous talk by Joel Grus and we'll talk about this and and he said that notebooks are terrible. Um they're really bad from a software engineering point of view and and at the time and maybe still now to a certain extent I I agree with him because um you know I' I've I've done ML DevOps. I've worked in large organizations you know like trying to figure out how do we bridge like data science and software engineering and claude code is already more towards the software engineering side and what that means is it creates item potent stateless repeatable artifacts right so as you say from a pedagogical point of view it's really good having this stateful feedback because I can understand what's going on but then I need to translate that into something which is deployable and can you tell us the story of you You you responded to Joel Bruce, didn't you? And and it was a bit of a fiasco, wasn't it? But what just tell us about that story? >> He did a really good video called uh I don't like notebooks. Um it was uh hilarious. It was really well done. Um and uh yeah, I was totally wrong. And all the things he said notebooks can't do, they can. And all the things he said you can't do with notebooks, I do with notebooks all the time. So it was a very good very amusing uh incorrect talk. So then I did a kind of a parody of it called um I like notebooks um in which I basically copied with credit most of his slides and showed how every one of them was totally incorrect. But like I actually think your comment about it does come down to the heart of it which is this diff difference between like how software engineering is normally done versus how scientific research and similar things is normally done and I think and I agree there is a dichotomy there and I think that dichotomy is a real shame because I think software development is being done wrong. uh it's being done in this way which is yeah all about reproducibility and these like dead these dead pieces you know it's it's all dead code dead files I I will never be able to express this one millionth as clearly as um as Brett Victor has in his work so I'd encourage people who haven't watched Brett Victor to to to watch him but you know he he's he shows again and again how a [snorts] direct connection you a direct visceral connection with the thing you're doing is is all that matters, you know, and that's his mission is to make sure people have that connection and that's basically my mission as well. So for me, traditional software engineering is as far from that as it is possible to get. I think it's I think it's gross. Like I I I find it disgusting and I find it sad that people are being forced to work like that. It's like I think it's inhumane and I just don't think it works very well. I mean empirically it doesn't work very well. Uh and it's much less good for for AI as well as it's much less good for humans. It hasn't always been that way like you know with with Ellen K and Small Talk and uh Iverson and APL you know Lisp Wolf with Mathematica. It to me these were the golden days when when people were focused on the question of how do we get the human into the computer to work as closely with it as possible. You know, that's where the the mouse came from, for example, like to like click and drag and visualize entities in your computer as things you can move around. So, I feel like we've lost that. I think it's really sad. Yeah. With claude code and stuff, the the default way of working with them is to go super deep into it. It's like, okay, there's a whole folder full of files. You never even look at them. Your entire interaction with it is through a prompt. >> Yeah. >> I it it it literally disgusts me. Like I literally think it's it's inhumane and it's my mission remains the same as it has been for like 20 years, which is to stop people working like this. >> I know. But so casting my mind back, I used to work with data scientists. They were using Jupyter notebooks. And what I found was typically I mean back then you couldn't if you checked them into git it wouldn't look very good. Most of these data scientists didn't know how to use git. They would run the cells out of order which means it wouldn't be reproducible. There all sorts of things like that. But the thing is I agree with you that you you can use them in this in this workflow. But it comes back to what I was saying before about you know we we were talking about the call center and it being like a low intelligence job. You know the data scientists the reason why they they are doing intelligent work is they are actually creating something that doesn't exist. They are figuring out the the the contours of a problem. They're actually working in a domain that is poorly understood. But you could argue now the bull case is when the data scientists can succinctly describe the contours of the problem. Maybe we could go to claude code and we could implement it properly. But how do we bridge between those two worlds? >> I think that'd be a terrible terrible idea. you know like >> you don't want to remove people from their exploratory environment you know um research and and uh um science is developed by people building insight you know um whoever you listen to you know whether it be Feainman or whatever like you you always hear from the great scientists how They build deeper intuition by by building mental models which they get over time by interacting with the things that they're learning about. Now like in Feman's case because it was theoretical physics he couldn't actually pick up a spinning quark but he did literally study spinning plates. You know you got to find ways to to deeply interact with with what you're working with. Like so so many times I've seen data science teams because you're right, data science teams aren't very familiar with Git and aren't very familiar with things that they do need to understand. Um, and so often I've seen a a software engineer will become their manager and their fix to this will be to tell them all to stop using Jupyter notebooks and now they have to use all these reproducible blah blah virtual, you know, virtual end blah blah. they destroy these teams over and over again. I've seen this keep happening um because the solution is not create more discipline and bureaucracy, it's solve the actual problem. So for example, we we built a um a thing called an NB merge driver which a lot of people don't realize this but actually uh notebooks are extremely git friendly. It's just that Git doesn't ship with a merge driver for them. So, Git only ships with a merge driver for uh linebased text files, but it's fully pluggable. And so, you can easily plug in one for JSON files instead. And so, we wrote one. So, now when you diff, you know, when you get a get diff with our merge driver, you see cell level diffs. If you get a merge conflict, you get surge level cell level merge conflicts. the the notebook is always openable in Jupiter. Um NB Dime did the same thing. So two independent implementations of this. >> So yeah, there were problems to solve, you know. Um but the solution to it was not throw away Brett Victor's ideas and make people further away from from their exploratory tools, but to fix the exploratory tools. And I think all software developers should be using exploratory based programming to deepen their understanding of what they're working with so that they end up with a really strong mental model of the system that they're building and they're working with and then they can come up with um better solutions more incrementally better tested. I basically never have to use a debugger because I basically never have bugs and it's not because I'm a particularly good programmer. It's because I build things up small little steps and each step works and I can see it working and I can interact with it. So there's no room for bugs. You know, >> you know, I'm so torn on this because I agree with you and I'm also skeptical of people who say that organizations they they they converge onto ways of doing things and they no longer need to evolve. They no longer need to adapt. You know, innovation is adaptivity, right? And we should increase the surface area of adaptivity as much as we possibly can. So we need people that are constantly testing new ideas, finding these constraints. But by the same token, we need to use the cloud. We need to use CI/CD. We need to get this stuff into production. >> Yeah. So do you abs do but like there's absolutely no like so NBD ships with out ofthe-box CI integration and the like the tests are literally there like because the source is a notebook the entire exploration of like how does this API work you know what does it look like when you call it the implementation of the functions the examples of them the documentation of them the tests of them are in one place So it it's much easier to be a good software engineer in this environment. Um so yeah like do do both you know. >> So do you remember there was there was that existential risk should be an urgent priority and it was signed by folks like Hinton and and Demis and you responded um basically with a rebuttal and that was with um Aravind you know the the snake oil guy. Tell me about that. Do you think we should be worried about AI existential risk? >> I mean, that was a certain time, wasn't it? And I feel like things have changed a bit. Thank God. I feel like we we not just me and Ara, but um broadly speaking, the community of which we're a part kind of probably won that. Now we have other problems to worry about. But you know basically at that point um the prevailing narrative was AI is about to become autonomous. It could become autonomous at any moment and could destroy the world. Uh so very much comes from um you know Alysia Yukowsk's >> work which >> I think clearly has been shown to be wrong at many levels to this point. >> They would refute that obviously. Of course they would. >> Yeah, [laughter] >> it's one of those things that they can always refute just like any doomsday cult unless you give it a date uh and the date passes. >> Well, even I' I've updated a little bit in the sense that I I now think I would now say that these models can be said to be intelligent in restricted domains. The arc challenge showed that. So if you place constraints into the problem, you you can you can go faster towards a known goal. even agency. You you can put a planner on there and you can go if you if you know where you're going, you can go there faster, but that doesn't help you. Like you can have all the intelligence and agency in the world, but if you don't have the knowledge and the constraints, then you're going in the wrong direction faster. And I think they don't seem to appreciate that these models don't actually know the world. Like none of that was even relevant to Avan and my point which was and is that it's misunderstanding where the actual danger is >> which is that when you have a dramatically more powerful technology entering the world uh that can make some people dramatically more powerful. People who are in love with power will seek to monopolize that technology and the more powerful it is, the more strong that urge from those power- hungry people will be. So to ignore people, so here's the problem. If you're like, I don't care about any of that. All I care about is autonomous AI taking off, you know, singularity, paperclip, nano goo, whatever. The obvious solution to that is, oh, let's centralize power. And this is which is what we kept seeing particularly at that time. Let's give um uh either very rich technology companies or the government or both all of this power and make sure nobody else has it. In in my threat model, that's the worst possible thing you can do because you've centralized the ability to control in one place and therefore these people who are desperate for power just have to take over that thing. >> Could we distinguish though what you mean by power? Because we've we've just spent some of this conversation talking about how it's not actually as powerful as people think it is. >> But I but I'm but I'm not even that's what but mine is an even if thing, right? So, like I I I'm just saying even if it turns out to be incredibly powerful, right? Like I don't I don't even want to argue about whether it's going to be powerful because that's speculative. Even if it's going to be incredibly powerful, you still shouldn't centralize all of that power in the hands of one company or the government. >> Yeah. Because if you do, all of that power is going to be monopolized by power- hungry people and used to destroy civilization. Basically, you'll end up with a case where all of that wealth and power will be centralized with the kinds of people who who want it centralized. So like society for hundreds of years have faced this again and again and again you know so when it's like you know writing used to be something that only the most exclusive people had access to knowing about writing. And the same arguments were made. If you let everybody write, they're going to use it to write things that we don't want them to write and it's going to be really bad. You know, ditto with printing, ditto with the vote. Like, and again and again, society has to fight against this natural prediliction of the people that have the status quo power to be like, no, this is a threat. So when we're saying like, okay, what if AI turned out to be incredibly powerful, would it be better for society to be that to be kept in the hands of a few or spread out across society? >> My argument was the latter. Now, there's also an argument which is like, don't worry about it. It's not going to be that powerful anyway. I I just didn't want to go there because it's not an argument that's easy to win because you can't really say what's going to happen. We're all just guessing. But I can very clearly say like, well, if it happens, would it be a really good idea to only let Elon Musk have it or would it be a good idea to only let Donald Trump have it? >> Dan Hendris spoke about this offense defense asymmetry. So it's actually very important for us to have counterveailing um you know defenses. But let's just take that as a given for a minute because obviously when we look at something like Meta and Facebook, it's quite clear what the power imbalance is. You know, they they control all of our data. They they know what we're doing with with something like OpenAI and Claude. So it's it's not as good as we thought it was because actually humans still need to be involved. But for example, they have all of our data, right? and you might be working on some new innovative technology and you're using Claude and you're sending all of your information up there and they can now copy you. I mean what what kind of risks are you talking about to be more concrete? >> Yeah. No, I mean so I was not talking about any of those things, right? So at the time I was talking about this speculative question of what if AI gets incredibly powerful? I mean like like now for example they they say that this is the new means of production and that's that seems completely hyperbolic to me but like in your best estimation now if there are risks what are they >> if there are risks with the current state of technology I mean I think some of them are the ones we've discussed which is people enfeeing themselves by basically losing their ability to be to become more competent over That's that's that's the big risk I worry about the most. Um the privacy risk, it's there, but I'm not sure it's much more there than it was for Google and Microsoft before. Like you know, you used to work at Microsoft, you know, how much data they have about the average uh Outlook, Office, etc. user uh ditto for Google, you know, the average Google Workspace or Gmail user. um those privacy issues are real although I think there are bigger privacy issues around these companies which the government can outsource data collection to so back in the day it used to be companies like choice point and Axiom nowadays it's probably more companies like Palanteer the US government is um actually prohibited from building large databases about US citizens for example but It's not prohibited. Companies are not prohibited from doing so, and the government's not prohibited from contracting things to those companies. So, I mean, that's a huge worry, but I don't think it's one that AI is uniquely creating. It certainly you're in the UK, as you know, in the UK surveillance has been universal for quite a while now. It certainly makes it easier to use that surveillance, but a sufficiently wellresourced organization could just throw a thousand bodies at the problem. Um, so yeah, I'm not sure these are due privacy problems as maybe more common ones than they used to be. >> Yeah, >> Jeremy, I've just noticed the time. I need to get to the airport. >> All right, >> this has been amazing. >> Thank you, sir. Thank you for coming. >> Yeah. >> Hope you had a nice trip. Thank you so much.


## 7 Questions with Jeremy Howard (Answer.ai, fast.ai) on Open Source AI and Agents

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDkHJDgefyk

Hi, I'm Anish with NVIDIA and I'm here with 
Jeremy Howard from Answer.ai. Today I'm here   to ask Jeremy a couple of questions right after 
his keynote at the PyTorch Conference. So Jeremy   to begin what's been the biggest takeaway or 
highlight from the PyTorch Conference this week.   Yeah, the highlight for me is in some ways a 
low-light Anish which is that I've discovered   that everybody here talks about they all want to 
talk about agents and to me PyTorch was always built   for we really took to it because it's so human
friendly. It was all about supporting developers   and allowing humans to express themselves. The 
idea that we should be having an agent that we   outsource the work out to feels against what I 
understand PyTorch as being all about.  You know, so for me, I really hope that 
the dialogue starts to shift back towards where   we were when PyTorch first came out and we all 
said, "Wow, this is great." Because before that,   TensorFlow was taking over and TensorFlow was all 
about like let's make it easier for the computer.  And Soumith and Adam were like, "no, 
let's make it easier for the developer,   for the human." And that's why they won. That's 
why PyTorch won because it was all about how can   we support people better. So I've been 
disappointed to be honest to see how particularly   the PyTorch community which really should be all 
about supporting people as you know the folks   here at the conference a lot of them are really 
focused on like how do we make the machines take   over. Yeah that makes sense. In your keynote, 
you know, you talk quite heavily about like   let's not delegate agency to these agents, right? 
And that's something that struck me pretty   heavily because, you know, so many companies and 
CEOs are talking about how, you know, agents are   going to replace workers and we're seeing these 
mass layoffs and you know, people who I went to   college with are like, "hey, is our futures, 
you know, kind of cooked, right?" So recently,   you know, you launched Solveit, 
right? And I was pretty intrigued by it because it   was inspired by the George 
Polya book like that four-step decision process on   how to actually solve from basically first 
principles right so I'm curious how is Solveit   giving agency back to you know people 
trying to learn in general like how are you how   do you suggest like young people entering into 
the workforce or even people who've been in the   workforce for a while who are struggling to 
understand their future with the you know   uprising of agents per se. Yeah. So I think people 
who go all-in on agents right now are basically   guaranteeing their obsolescence. The reason is 
like one of two things is going to happen. Either   like we get AGI, ASI we're all obsolete in which case 
doesn't matter what I don't think that's likely   but it could right be more likely that doesn't 
happen. In which case, if you've outsourced all of   your thinking to computers for the last few years, 
you've stopped becoming a more competent human   being. You've stopped upskilling. You've stopped 
learning. You've wasted your time   and you're going to be in a group of people that is of no use to anybody. AI is actually great at helping you learn. You know, you 
can ask it to, you know, find good resources for   you, to help you with misunderstandings. So I would 
say also if you're running an organization, if you   go all in on agents, there's a good chance in two 
years time that will turn out to be the decision   that destroyed your company. And the reason why 
is that if in this quite likely future where we   don't have short-term AGI, etc., what's happened 
is you've created much much more code that fewer   and fewer people understand that you can't build 
on top of. You got two weak wins of like 18%   faster. But in two years time you end up 
with a massive spaghetti. That people look   around the company and say we can't make anything 
anymore. It's kind of like happened when   lots of companies used to outsource their work to 
the contractors and at some point they went like   we forgot how to do it ourselves. So with 
Solveit what we're trying to do is say here's an   environment and here's a technique for working 
with AI where the human is the agent where you   have agency where you're in control and you ask 
the AI for small pieces of help and that help is   particularly focused on helping you learn enough 
to do the next piece yourself. And then   this way you are becoming more and more effective 
at your job and your ability to have agency is   increasing and increasing. So I mean this 
seems like a fantastic way to put the agency   back in the developers hands but there's so 
much more than just developers right. So do   you have any takes on how people outside of just 
you know coders or programmers can actually you   know use the same method but in their respective 
fields? Yeah so we use this Solveit approach now   in our company for everything we do. We
do it for our writing, system administration,   business strategy, project management like 
and none of these things are we outsourcing it to   an AI. But in all of these things I'm keen to find 
out, you know, so communications for instance,   I try to collect all of the things necessary about 
something I want to communicate to my staff. AI can help me find like, hey, where are the 
places I've talked about this? What are all the   things related to that? What have some of my 
team said about these things? Okay, make   a list of everything that we'll need to cover. And 
then like I write everything myself, you know,   but I'm giving this kind of like super It's like 
having a supercharged executive assistant that has   read and remembered everything our company's ever 
done. So, we've invested heavily in making   sure all of our communications are archived and 
AI available and ready to retrieve, you know.   My co-founder Eric Ries is writing his next book 
in Solveit. The AI does not write the words.   This is Eric's book. Eric wrote every word, 
but Solveit helps him identifying,   you know, facts that haven't been properly cited 
or identifying awkward transitions or identifying   places where something in the introduction was 
not supported by the rest of the chapter text or   so forth. So, it's all about using AI to support 
you at your craft. And it retains the   humanness of like the work that Eric's creating, 
right? Yeah. Exactly. Yeah, that makes ton of   sense. So, pivoting a little bit, you're one 
of the GOATs of machine learning, so,  you've been in this space for, you know, over two 
decades just working on some very foundational   things. And so, you know, given this post 
ChatGPT era where we've seen explosion of  deep learning. How has this experience 
that you've had in deep learning and machine   learning in general helped you separate  
the hype from the actual groundbreaking   techniques that have come? Because it seems like 
every other week there's this new groundbreaking   technique that you know we all need to go learn 
about and figure out how to implement immediately   and so how have you been able to separate I 
don't know if it's necessarily fact or fiction   but just noise from what is actually truly 
groundbreaking and pushing the space forward? I   mean, you're a Fast AI alum, so I'm sure hopefully 
you appreciate it. Like, when you understand the   foundations, it's actually not that hard, right? 
Like, you just you read the paper. So, in Fast AI,   we teach people to read papers, to experiment with 
it, and we teach the underlying foundations so you   can make a good call. And so, I 
just haven't found it difficult at all. Like,   I just when somebody's like, "Here's a huge new 
thing."  I'll be like, "I'll check it out. I'll   go and read the paper. I'll experiment with 
it. And then I'll kind of say like, "Yes,   this does actually make a successful advance on 
this piece that previously wasn't very good, you   know, and I can use it in these places." And I'll 
try it out and then I'll try it out and I'll see   if it works well. Versus like, well, this is 
solving a problem that doesn't need to be solved   or this is solving a problem that somebody else 
already solved. I think if you know the foundational principles, it's not difficult. 
Like one interesting thing is how today's Fast AI   deep learning courses the content is largely 
the same as the 2017 one. Like you might   think like oh everything's changed. It's like no 
it's deep learning. It's it's stochastic gradient   descent. It's multiple layers of you know matrix 
multiplication followed by an activation function.   Like it's quite minor details that have changed in 
practice. That makes a lot of sense.   So I guess along those lines you noted 
that you know there's a ton of open source models   coming from China. You mentioned Meta and NVIDIA
doing a great job of publishing open models. What   have been the techniques in the last six to 
nine months that have really got you excited and   said okay we can continue to double down on these 
techniques to to continue reaping the progress?  Yeah, I think so Meta's done quite a bit 
of interesting work recently on trying to find   more kind of hybrid retrieval approaches and 
in fact funnily enough both Meta and   NVIDIA worked on this kind of retro system 
a few years ago where they kind of incorporated   retrieval into the training itself. So those 
companies are both doing very interesting work   in kind of like thinking about external memories 
and hierarchies of memories and stuff like that.   There's also some interesting work coming out of 
Stanford called Cartridges which is a similar idea   which is actually quite similar to something that 
DeepSeek came out with two days ago. This idea of   OCR as a different encoding. I think
there's a huge amount of room to make things more   efficient. I also am interested in the 
hybrid diffusion approaches. So our most recent   previous course was on diffusion, and the 
idea of diffusion can kind of look at everything   more holistically rather than autoreggressively 
and map out the general approach and then an autoreggressive model can then fill in the details. I 
think you know Google's done some interesting work   there. Also bit more specialized, but 
actually NVIDIA's work in speech-to-text   with Parakeet is really exciting. It's 
just dramatically more efficient than anything   else. So I use Parakeet on my Mac now. And just 
having something that turns my speech into text   almost instantly lets me just get my thoughts 
out very quickly and then I'm kind of much more   in the zone. So when I teach, people are always 
like, Jeremy, I can't believe how you're using   voice for everything. That looked great. How do 
you do that? Like, just download software and use   Parakeet. It just works. It's crazy 
good now. That's a great answer. So,   one of the biggest I guess open source 
opposition arguments is that one it's   not commercially viable and the second is that it 
doesn't really align with safety. And so something   I'm curious about is how can open source 
engineers and enthusiasts like me actually help   with AI safety efforts and what argument 
do you have against these people who say building   an open source can't be commercially viable? Well, 
we've heard it all before, you know. So, if you're   around in the late 90s, early 2000s, that was what 
Microsoft were doing. Steve Balmer was doing he was the guy who coined the term like open- 
source licenses are viral licenses and this is   a virus in your organization and it's going to 
destroy your company and it's going to destroy   America's ability to compete on the global stage. 
That turned out not to be the case. In fact, open source has been at the heart of 
America's success. America has been the foremost,   you know, jurisdiction where open source 
has taken off and has been widely used. So,   it's just empirically not true. And of 
course it's not true. Like if you're if you   create something that you allow more people to 
use to build on top of to cooperate so that they   each build on top of each other. Obviously that's 
going to be better. Than ivory towers,   you know. And what about safety? Well, surely 
having more people be able to use a powerful   technology, is better than less. Particularly if 
the less is only rich and powerful people can   use it, right? Well, they're going to use it to 
be become more rich and powerful. So, it's going   to be like, you know, killer drones and it's going 
to be, you know, global surveillance and it's going to be horrible. When you put 
technology into the hands of society as a whole,   then people learn from it. They defend with 
it. They become engaged with it. You know,   you'll end up with less awful policies and 
awful ideas when more people are engaged in the   technology. Great answer. And finally 
to end off, as I mentioned, you know, I'm a Fast   AI alum, that was super deeply transformational 
for me to even learn about the space and so in   general as you talked about this AI becoming a 
worldwide technology that everyone needs to have   at their fingertips, what is the original 
conception of fast.ai and everything you're doing   with answer.ai now, how are you guys thinking 
about this you know bringing this technology to   even more people's fingertips especially because 
you've been such a foundational figure for so   many people? Well, you know, Anish, like you and 
I are both arts graduates, right? And so we both   were in an environment where we weren't learning 
all this math and computer science and so we had to learn it for ourselves. The vast majority 
of the world is like us. They didn't go and do   computer science at Stanford, right? But that 
doesn't mean that people like us have nothing   to contribute, right? You've ended up at NVIDIA, 
which is like congratulations to you. You can't   do much better than that. Like to to me 
this is the foundational idea behind Fast AI that   my wife and I wanted as we looked around the world 
in 2015 and said there are six labs in the world   that can actually create effective deep learning 
models. They're keeping all the details to   themselves. I remember Rachel, 
my wife and co-founder at Fast AI asked I think it was Ilya. She asked Ilya at a 
2016 meetup, how do you or maybe it was   Krizhevsky, I can't remember. How do you actually 
do the transfer learning and this Oh,   it must have been Krizhevskyi because it's the ImageNet 
thing. And he said like, "Oh,   we don't publish that, you know, that's
just our kind of secret sauce." We thought   that's not okay. You know, so we wanted 
to put the technology in the hands of everybody   and let everybody contribute to it, you know, and 
here we are, you know, two arts graduates hanging   out at the PyTorchh Conference talking about open 
source. I think it's gone pretty well.  I would say so, too. Alright. Well, Jeremy, 
thank you so much for your time. Really appreciate   it. Thanks so much for the the great answers and 
really look forward to everything you're doing,  and we'll definitely be supporting and, we 
have a special surprise to share with you. Well,   you've given us so much with Fast AI. You've 
personally taught me so much and so it feels   so surreal to be able to do this. But on behalf of 
NVIDIA, really excited to give you DGX Spark. It's   beautiful. This is our new prototyping device 
and you know local device that we've developed so   that you know developers like you and I can just 
prototype at our desk without needing you know big   datacenter GPUs. Thanks Anish. Hope you enjoy it. 
Hope it becomes super helpful as you're tinkering   over the next few years and decade. But it's a hefty 
thing. It's quite solid.


## Build to Last — Chris Lattner talks with Jeremy Howard

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WJS2YDZO-vc

Hi, Jeremy Howard here, with Chris Lattner, a man who probably needs no introduction, but I'll give you a bit of intro to anyway. Good day, Chris. Welcome. Thank you for joining us. >> It's great to be able to spend time with you and hang out and talk on this nice Sunday. Yeah. Um Chris, how long have you known each other? I think it was the very first TensorFlow Dev Summit that we met. >> Yeah, probably 2017. So, it's been uh not long enough, but a good a good amount of time. We've been through a number of different projects together, and so we uh developed a mutual distaste for TensorFlow pretty early on. I was trying to [laughter] trying to fix it at the time. >> fixing it. >> Yes. Yeah, and so I was making it better or trying to. Um But, the experience of those early days of that first that first TensorFlow Dev Summit, you were fresh new to to AI. A large percentage of the people there today are >> [snorts] >> running big labs or, you know, uh world-known folks. And you brought in a very different background to anybody else that was there. Your your PhD project turned into LLVM, which today is at the heart of most of the world's most successful programming languages. You built a C++ compiler on top of that, which is very widely used, including Google. You built an Objective-C compiler. And then you thought, what the hell, it's all too easy. So, you built a new programming language called Swift, which is running all the stuff I'm using right now to talk to you. Um And what I found interesting is when you then came into to AI. You definitely didn't say, oh cool, everyone's everybody did use TensorFlow, and you went, everybody uses TensorFlow, cool, I'll tweak TensorFlow. You basically did the same thing. To like, what is this mission that you've been on for the last you're a young man, what is that, two or three years? Um that kind of has you starting at the bottom, and and what did that look like when you hit the AI world? Well, so so Jeremy, you and I have some things in common. I think you know this, but other people may not. We like to build things, and we like to build things from the fundamentals. We like to understand them. We like to ask questions, right? And so, for me, my journey has always been this uh like trying to understand the fundamentals of what makes something work. And then when you do that, you start to realize that a lot of the existing systems are actually not that great. Right? And so, for me, at least, you then feel compelled to say, well, how about we make it better? At least for the ones that matter. And so, AI systems, programming languages, compilers, and systems, and tools, there's a lot of things out there, and none of them were really great. And so, I have thrown myself into trying to make this better. And through all of that, I've been doing a lot of coding. So, I've been a developer my whole whole career. >> you that your underlying mission here is or your kind of quest is to create higher-level ways of talking to machines. Like, what why are you trying to do that? And how on earth does creating LLVM, the lowest possible layer of talking to machines, help in that mission? Well, so I think that computing is a big part of our lives, right? And we see it through the products we use. We see it even if you're not a programmer, in the widgets, and the devices, and the connected components that are all just ticking over everything. AI is the most recent manifestation of this, of course, right? But but that doesn't happen unless programmers, developers can actually build these experiences. And so, I'm curious about your background, too, Jeremy. Like, so you've built a few things. You built fast.ai and many other things. So, what what threw you into this, and and what makes you passionate about building things? I mean, I'm I'm not sure my quest is that different to yours. Um You're interested in creating higher-level ways of talking to machines. I think I'm pretty interested in the whole conversation of like also higher-level ways of machines talking to us. Um Unlike you, I don't have a fancy PhD, and so I never had the tools in my toolkit to go and start at the bottom and build it from from there. So, I think I've kind of come in the opposite direction of starting at the top and gradually going down. And interestingly, we've met in the middle. Um which is So, we worked together on a project called Swift for Swift for TensorFlow, which had nothing to do with TensorFlow, but was actually one part of you saying, okay, we have to throw away everything and restart. So, you built MLIR, which is kind of like LLVM, but for the modern world, and then you built Swift for TensorFlow on that, but you also built out stuff for TPUs, and you also built out the TensorFlow runtime, and you you did the whole thing again. You built all these layers of abstraction. And and I had kind of come from the opposite direction, and we were both there saying like, okay, we need a better way >> Because you actually know AI, right? So, you you know the the use case. You understand the researcher pain points. You understand what was beautiful about PyTorch. I think you were one of the first people and Andre We were the first people on PyTorch, yeah. back in like 0.3 kind of time frames, and back before PyTorch was inevitable and obvious. And so, um and so you brought a lot of the domain expertise. And so, as a tool builder myself, right, the thing that you need is you need who's who's the person that you're solving the problem for, right? And so, finding experts like yourself that actually understand um not just what people are doing today, but also the frontier sheer. And it was the lack of that integrated end-to-end system that was killing me, cuz I remember when I first met you, I said like, oh Chris, you're coming to work on TensorFlow, are you? Need to warn you, it's kind of And I spent half an hour telling you all the ways it was terrible. And then you didn't yell at me. Instead, you said that that sounds very interesting. Let's fix it together. Um And cuz what I wanted for my students, for myself, for my research, was to to never get stuck where I'd be like, how does that work? How does that work? How does that work? Until I get to the point where it's like, okay, that's the thing I need to fix. And with like PyTorch or TensorFlow, you don't get very far at all before it's like, oh, this is inside, you know, the flash attention three kernel that was actually in Triton, but it's actually then being converted to this different language, and then it was compiled, and then Or some binary CUDA blob. Yeah, I don't know what just happened. Um >> Yeah. And that just felt absolutely unacceptable to me. And even Swift for TensorFlow, I remember complaining to you about that, cuz I was like, what about auto diff? What's that written in? You're like, C++. I'm like, what am I meant to do about that, Chris? Yeah. Yeah. So, >> Well, I think I I I think it's fair to say that I learned a lot from that project. >> [laughter] >> Um but, you know, interestingly, just like LLVM, how long ago was that, Chris, that you wrote it? It was actually more than two or three years. >> 25 years ago. I started it over Christmas break in 2000. 25 years. So, there's a project that the world has been using, you know, and still uses everywhere. And interestingly, when you kind of reinvented that with MLIR, you know, which is like a intermediate representation for massive multi-core heterogeneous compute blah blah blah processes and matrix manipulations and all that, it's it's the same thing's happened, you know? Everything today is now getting built on on MLIR, you know? Um so, Well, so so the question of the day is, how do you build a system that actually can last more than six months? Right? Because the reason that those systems were fundamental and that they became scalable and were enabled to be successful and then grow, but then didn't crumble under their own weight, is because the architecture of those systems actually worked well, right? They were well designed. They were scalable. Uh the people that worked on them had an engineering culture that they came together, and they rallied behind because they want to make them technically excellent, right? And so, I think that that's something that enables systems to actually be more than just, you know, a solution to a today problem. In the case of LLVM, for example, it was never designed to support the Rust programming language or Julia or something like this, or even Swift, right? But, because it was designed and architected for that, you could build programming languages. Snowflake could go build a database optimizer, which was really cool, and a whole bunch of other applications of the technology came out of architecture, right? And I think that's something that today, you know, architecture and some of the craftsmanship that goes into building things is at risk. Like, it's under threat today. Really? I was I was hearing I was thinking the same thing as you said it. I was thinking like, okay, the things you're describing feel very different to the culture that I feel is being pushed very hard by the world around me. Like, I'm feeling this pressure to say, screw craftsmanship. Screw caring. You know, we hear VCs say, oh, my founders are telling me I can they're getting out 10,000 lines of code a day. Are we crazy Chris are we are we are we old man men yelling at the clouds being like, back in my day, we cared about craftsmanship, you know, or >> No, no, it's I think it's a I mean, so to me, I think that there's a thing going on, and it's kind of driven by sometimes VCs, but but moreover by the world that's eager for progress. Let me tell you a story. In In 2017, I was at Tesla working on self-driving cars and I was leading the autopilot software team. >> So you were. And I was convinced that in 2020 these cars would be everywhere and it would be solved and it was this desperate race to go solve autonomy. Um in fact, my job, which I failed at by the way, was to get a Tesla to drive coast to coast from LA to New York. Of course, here we are uh 8 years later. Nobody else has solved that problem either but not that I know. >> to get that working? Yeah, a little bit less than that. Okay. But uh at the time nobody even knew how hard that was. But what was going around, what was in the air is trillions of dollars are at stake. Job replacement, farming, transportation. Look at the TAM of all of the uh human capital that is being put in transportation and with one cute trick that'll be replaced. And I think that today exactly the same thing is happening. Today it's not about self-driving, although yes, it's making progress. I think a little bit less gloriously and immediately than people thought but it is making progress. But now it's about programming, right? And so I think a lot of people are saying, "Oh my gosh, tomorrow all programmers are going to be replaced by AGI and therefore we might as well give up, go home. Why are we doing any of this anymore? Uh code is like if you're learning how to code or if you're um you know, taking pride in what you're building then you're not doing it right. And I think that this is something that I'm pretty concerned of. Yeah, and and it's it's almost worse than that, right? And the the analogy there is actually really striking cuz I remember when you were at Tesla, it wasn't just like we're on the cusp. It was very specifically all Tesla needs is a bit more data because data is the oil and you just grab the data and instantly you have yourself a self-driving car. And that's now what we're hearing, you know, that's the bit of lesson which Rich Sutton is now saying is being totally misunderstood. Um is like, "Oh, you just need more data and and AGI is inevitable and it's around the corner. And if that was true it's a whole question there about how would one live one's life but it hasn't been true in the past [laughter] and Yeah. it it doesn't it doesn't feel I don't know. I don't know. What do you think, Chris? Yeah, it's like >> Well well so so Jeremy, I'm I'm not the AI researcher. So I'm going to spin this phone around and ask you this, right? But to me, I believe that progress looks like S-curves, right? And pre-training was a big deal. It seemed exponential but actually it S-curved out and got flat as things went on. I think that we have a number of piled up S-curves that are all driving forward amazing progress. But I at least have not seen that spark. And so I guess a a quick question for you, an easy easy slowball for you is like, "What is AGI made out of? Is it just more layers in your transformer? Is it just more parameters, more experts in your MoE? Like or is it something fundamentally different?" And and another way to spin this is like, "Is it actually next year or 5 years off or is it actually maybe something we'll not actually get to at least economically?" So I mean, something I haven't talked about much is that maybe I should here is, you know, as you know, I I created the first LLM. And you you melt it? Uh-huh. Yeah, and I can tell you why I created it and I can tell you what it's looked like since then. I didn't create it to create AGI. And everything that's happened since then is exactly what I hoped and expected would happen um with the LLMs. Which is to say I was telling everybody in 2017 you know, and 2018 this approach and in fact I was talking in academic conferences before that even. This is an approach which by learning the next word of a sentence predictor, it must build internal abstractions that would allow it to solve a wide variety of problems quite concisely and crisply with a smaller amount of data and so fine-tuning is the key thing. Um and so nowadays we use exactly the same three-step approach. We train a big language model, we fine-tune it on instruction tuning nowadays and then you fine-tune it on a classifier which is RLHF nowadays. Yeah, none of that process was ever designed to create AGI. There's no reason to believe it would. It's um it it it's a very big uh pattern predictor machine and it's funny for years I was the one telling people you're deeply underappreciating how important a big pattern recognizing machine in natural language is. It can actually solve all kinds of problems and you can actually talk to it and it will actually like the amount of things which are just which are interpolation. Sorry? Everything's a remix, right? Yeah, exactly. The amount of To some extent that's actually quite valuable for a lot of different reasons. If you could interpolate between everything in the internet that's a lot. But like you and I both know that when you're literally on the cutting edge of anything. And some of those things I find you hit very quickly cuz they're very small things. Suddenly GPT-5 or Sonnet 4.5, whatever, become incredibly stupid. Like they just start saying things that you're like ah you actually had no idea what you're talking about the whole time. It was all a big pretense. Well, the big pretense was very helpful actually when I Yeah. needed help but Well so so as as not the AI researcher, I'll say this, right? So I have I've been surprised multiple times with AI. I am a maximalist. I want AI into all of all of our lives, all the products. I am continuously delighted by what we can do. However, the thing I don't like is I don't like the people that are making decisions as though AGI or ASI were here tomorrow. Right? Because if you're going to live your life in fear and if it isn't actually coming or maybe it's 20 years from now or it's 30 years from now or something, who knows? And I I'm not saying that. It's not my place to speculate but but being paranoid, being anxious, being afraid of living your life and of building a better world seems like a very silly and not a very pragmatic thing to do. And so again, I can't tell. Maybe come back tomorrow. But but I don't see it as a practical thing. A really good point. So if I mean first I'll say people often ask me you know, where where is AGI? And I've been doing AI for a bit over 30 years and I tell people I I can't tell you with any more certainty than I could 30 years ago or 20 years ago or 10 years ago. Been fantastic. Interest in a lot of investment, a lot of improvements. But there's nothing particularly about that that makes me think oh AGI is closer you know, it's 5 years away now whereas 30 years ago I thought it wasn't. Like it's it's a different path. >> It could be like fusion. Fusion's always 5 years or 50 years away. >> very useful path but there's nothing particularly about it that says like oh this isn't AGI path. You know, so if we had AGI in 5 years, I wouldn't be shocked. 30 years ago if we had AGI in 5 years, I wouldn't have been that shocked then either. Like it you know, but I'm not going to live my life differently cuz it doesn't feel any different. But it it it in my heart it kind of does because being able to use a user interface with a computer which is actually the language I speak does feel really different. And it feels even more different to people that aren't AI researchers. And so everybody else around the world is doing this like AGI's around the corner. If you're not doing everything with AI, you're an idiot. And honestly, Chris, it does get to me. Like I I like I question myself. And I've seen that at my company. We we had a few months there where we I think we'd I'd have to say we we struggled to continue to believe in our vision. But everybody was like agents, agents, agents. And so a lot of us just did end up being like we can't not do this. Everybody else is doing this. They're writing 10,000s of lines of code a day. It's ridiculous that we're not. Are we doing Are we doing something wrong because we're not getting the 10x wins that everybody else is claiming they're getting? So we really invested in it. You know, and all of my team is amongst the best in the world at practical usage of AI. And the results were just terrible. We we our productivity fell off a cliff. Our morale fell off a cliff. I was unhappy. How do you measure productivity? Is it number of lines of code written? Or is it product progress? Or is it something else? >> It's getting out the door that people use. Yeah. So that's how I measure productivity, too, right? And so >> seen this, Chris? Like I mean, you've got lots of people working for you, super smart, know a lot about AI. Did Did they find the trick to writing these 10,000s of lines of code a day which transformed your company and you're now going twice as fast or a thousand times as fast or Well so so no. No, I mean, I I use AI coding. I think it's a very important tool. Um I feel like I get a 10 to 20% improvement, some really fancy code completion and auto complete and it's amazing for learning uh a code base you're not familiar with. So it's great for discovery. I do a lot of production code work but it's I it probably is 5 or 10x productivity for prototypes. I think that's that's a place where it can be a huge deal if you're just saying crank out five different theories and you can get to a working mock-up or air quote working, but there I can see major productivity wins, but for the kinds of work that we do, um it's not that great. And the reason is is that I don't measure progress based on number of lines of code written. In fact, I see code as or verbose redundant code. I mean, take take one example of this, which is unit tests. So, AI is really great at writing unit tests. This is one of the things that nobody likes to write tests. It feels super productive to say just crank out a whole bunch of tests and look, I've I've got all this code. Amazing. But there's a problem, right? Because [clears throat] unit tests are their own potential tech debt. Absolutely. >> the test may not be testing the right thing. Um if you're using mocking >> a detail of the thing rather than the real idea of the thing. And if you're using mocking, now you get all this like super tightly bound uh implementation details in your tests, which make it very difficult to change the architecture of your product as things evolve, right? And so tests are just like the uh code in your main application, where you should think about them. Also, lots of tests take a long time to run, and so they they impact your future development velocity. There's like all these things, and so um so to me, the the question is not how do you get to the most code? Like I'm not uh CEO bragging about the number of lines of code written by AI. That's I think a completely useless metric. The question is like how productive are people at getting stuff done, at making the product better. This is what I care about. And what have you seen? Like if you have you seen I mean, there must be people using these kind of trying out these highly agentic workflows, vibe coding style things in your company? Like what how has that gone? So, I'll give you some negative examples first, right? So, I've seen somebody a senior engineer who you know, a bug gets reported and it's like let the agentic loop rip, go spend some tokens and maybe it'll come up with a bug fix and create a PR and go. Get this PR and it's completely wrong. It made It made the symptom go away, so it air quote fixed the bug, but it just was so wrong that if it had been merged and it didn't, uh but if it had been merged, then it would have just made the product way worse because now suddenly you replace one one bug with a whole bunch of other bugs that are harder to understand, a ton of code that's just in the wrong place doing the wrong thing, and so that is deeply concerning. And to me, the actual concern is not this engineer because fortunately, they're a senior engineer, they're smart enough not to just say like, "Okay, it passes tests, merge." Uh we also do code review, which is also a very important thing, by the way. Um but the concern I have is that it's this culture of, "Okay, well, I'm not even going to try to understand what's going on. I'm just going to like spend some tokens and maybe it'll be great, and now I can not have to think about it." This is a huge concern because a lot of evolving a product is not just about getting the results, it's about the team understanding the architecture of the code. Yeah. Right? And so if you're delegating knowledge to hopefully an AI, uh but you're now just you know, reviewing the code. >> not thinking about I think that's very very very concerning. Yeah, it's it's missing the whole point of the the the craft of software engineering, isn't it? Cuz software engineering has always been about trying to get a product that gets better and better, and your ability to work on that product gets better and better, and things get easier and easier, and things get faster and faster. And that's about you building better and better abstractions and better and better understandings in your head, and I mean, to fundamentally what you're trying to do with again, there's lots of different kinds of software projects. Uh software generally lives for more than 6 months or a year, right? And so the kinds of things I work on and I think the kinds of systems that you like to build also are things that you continue to evolve. Right? You look at the Linux kernel, right? The Linux kernel has existed for decades now with tons of different people working on that. made possible by an architect, Linus, who is driving consistency, driving uh abstractions, and driving improvement in lots of different directions. And so that longevity is made possible by that architecture question. And >> a high level of craft from everybody. >> Yes. And sometimes being an about it, but I don't think that's because he cares so much, you know. I don't think that's required, but the uh I mean, different different >> I don't think it's required, but it's >> Different tasks are fine, but but the but the thing that's required is for people to actually give a damn. Like so people that care about what they're doing, people that be proud of their work, and as you say, the craftsmanship. Software craftsmanship, I think, is the thing that AI code threatens, not because it's impossible to use properly. Again, I use it, I feel like I'm you know, doing it well, and I care a lot about the quality of the code, but because it encourages folks to not take the craftsmanship and the design and the architecture seriously, instead just evolve to get my bug queue to be shallower and just make the symptoms go away. And I think that's the thing that I find concerning. Yeah. Yeah, our focus at at Answer AI and fast.ai is all about it's a you know, despite being a very long-running AI research lab, the focus has always been the humans, you know. fast.ai's original first goal was can we make it so that people without a PhD can use AI. And that was absolutely unheard of. Absolutely insane. You know. So Jeremy, let me that we you and I have a lot in common, but let me tell you one big difference between two of us is that I always am obsessed with building things and chasing my interests and like understanding the next the next thing and and digging into things. You actually take time to teach people things. This is one of the reasons you've had so much impact on the world, particularly with fast.ai, but with many of your other projects, is that you don't just do a thing and fill your head with knowledge and build systems, you then actually take it back and do the hard work of trying to get other people to understand it, which is a completely next next level next level problem, by the way, because humans are complicated. And so I think that that that approach is something that you've brought uh to Answer AI, but also it's what enables the tools, the technologies, the ideas to actually get out. And I wish I had spent more time doing that. I I disagree with the implication you haven't, Chris. I mean, with stuff like the VLM foundation and the way you've built these open source communities and you've created you've I I actually think you're much more patient with humans than I am. But yeah, I mean, I I do think that you know, that that idea of teaching is important and and at at Answer AI now, you know, I I always tell my staff I'm much more interested in if you spent the day learning a lot more about a thing or getting much better at a thing than producing one extra bug fix or one extra feature because then tomorrow you'll be twice as good at that thing. And those things uh just like gain this momentum, right? And you get better and better at doing stuff, and you can do more and more as a human. And the feeling is magnificent of being good at something, like being really good at something, and and being able to branch out and be using that to get good at other things. And I think that was part of our mention, like we had these kind of months where we went off and doing stuff with the agentic loops and whatever, and I was miserable. I was not improving. >> vibe coding things, and suddenly you're what what I've seen another thing I've seen is that people that say like, "Okay, well, maybe it'll work." It's almost like a test, and you go off maybe the agentic thing will go crank out some code and spend all this time waiting >> a gambling machine, right? >> coaching, and then and then it's like, "Oh, it didn't." >> [laughter] >> It's like pull the lever again. Try again. >> Yeah, exactly. Exactly. And and again, I'm not saying the tools are useless or bad or something like this, right? But when you take a step back and you look at where is it adding value and how, right? I mean, I think that there's a little bit too much enthusiasm, and they're like, "Okay, well, when when AGI happens, it's going to solve the problem." Um I'm waiting and seeing. Um well, so here's here's another aspect of it, right? So, the anxiety piece. So, I see a lot of a lot of junior engineers that are for example, coming out of school, and they're very worried about, "Will I be able to get a job?" And I think a lot of things are changing, and I don't really know what's going to happen. Um but uh to your point earlier, a lot of them say, "Okay, well, I'm just going to vibe code everything." Right? Because this is productivity, this is air quotes expected. But I think that's also a significant problem. Seems like a career killer to me. Absolutely. And so if I were coming out of school, my advice is don't pursue that path. Particularly if everybody is zigging, it's time to zag. Um what you want to get to, particularly as your career evolves, is you want to get to mastery, so you can be the senior engineer, and so that you can actually understand things to a depth that other people don't, and that's how you kind of escape out of that um the thing that everybody can do to get more differentiation. Which might require finding the right company, you know, cuz some CEOs are doing this like we're going to judge people based on how much AI they use, you know, and how many lines of code they have AI create and you know, I guess there're going to be some places to work that maybe you just shouldn't. Um, but Well, there's outside of AI, there's a lot of reasons why certain companies are career dead ends. And so, I don't think that's actually particularly new. It's just that now it's some of the shinier tech companies are trending towards some of the other things that people were not to do in a previous generation. What you mean? >> Chris. Oh, also, I mean the I'm not going to name names, but right, there it used to be that the Google or the Microsoft or the other meta, the big companies were the shining stars and career progression and then there's other other like less Silicon Valley companies that were in the Midwest or something, they're not as shiny and awesome and we're not seen as as prestigious. Um, and so, you know, you could theoretically have a faster career growth if you went to Silicon Valley or something like that, but um, but I think the the question is really about progress. It's about you as an engineer, what are you learning? How are you getting better? How much mastery do you develop? Why is it that you're able to solve problems that other people can't solve? And if everybody's using the same tools, you need to find a way to differentiate yourself and figure out either domain expertise or a portfolio of what you've done or ideally the ability to build things that actually are sustainable and scalable and actually work well. Um, and so, if everybody's, you know, just using the same AI coding tool, like you need to figure out how to like break past that a little bit instead of just doing the that wrote, you know, unfulfilling button pushing. >> to I'd love to tell you a bit I mean, I know you know a bit about it, but I'd love to tell you a bit about the, you know, AI coding tool that we're building because because you've been part of that journey for many years and have been an inspiration for some of it. Um, I remember when we were sitting next to each other, working together, um, that we both had something in common, which is we both had a very tight iteration loop and we had different ones. Uh, my one >> important to me. Yeah. Um, yeah, I I remember the first thing I said to you and your team is like, okay guys, if we're going to work together on this Swift thing, I'm going to need a notebook, you know, and you immediately were like, of course you do. You do. Right. We're and like a week later, you're like, here's a Swift kernel, all the AI stuff works, you know, and I was straight into it then cuz I could like I can type, see the result, type, see the result, and I'm manipulating the data through a process step by step and watching it. And you know, very much that kind of, um, Bret Victor style, you know, his his inventing on principle of like you want to be close, you know, you want to be crafting the the the thing through the steps and watching it. And you had a very different set of tools. But I mean, you you say, how do you create this tight tight iteration loop? Because it's it in statically, you know, compiled things and low-level things, it's probably a bit different. I'm not an expert on it. Yeah, so I work on systems and systems are slightly different, but what I care about is I care about that that that loop of edit the code, compile, run it. Get a get a test that fails and then debug it and iterate on that loop. And so, there's a number of things go into that. One is uh, just the build system. Make sure you can incrementally build just the target that you care about, just the executable or just the set of >> like seconds. Yes, exactly. Um, the next is running tests. Running tests should take less than a minute, ideally less than 30 seconds. And so, you're not going to run all of the tests in the modular mono repo in 30 seconds, let me tell you that, right? But when you're working on a component, you're not you're running all of the tests, you're working on one piece. Now, what that means is that you actually have to design your test suite. You have to design the architecture. You have to design and build uh, testing specific tools. This is something that I think LLVM has been quite good at. And so, it's one of the things that was very unusual, it's very different than what GCC, for example, did before, where LLVM has a number of tools that are not the C compiler, but they're just the optimizer or they're just the uh, the parser or they're a small piece of a larger system, so you can write unit tests and actually investing into the test harness, you can but write large-scale, efficient run, reusable tests instead of just doing like G tests for everything is a is a big piece of that. And so again, this comes back to the software craftsmanship. Like thinking about the big picture as things evolve, as naturally codebases get bigger, it's very rare that a production codebase ever gets smaller, right? Usually they just grow and grow and grow until they start crumbling under their own weight. Um, this this is quite important. And so, I care a lot about that and we've both really deeply invested in our tools, you know, like we've written you know, so now at Mojo, you know, I know that's something else you've been working on. It's like I was I was quite surprised at how quickly you had a full VS Code development environment with all the niceties, but then I kind of thought, well, of course Chris would focus on making, you know, having his team do that first because without tools that let you create quick iterations, Yeah. all of your work is going to be slower and more annoying and more wrong. Yeah, well, so in the case of Mojo, I think there's two things going on. One is fortunate to have an amazing team. >> [laughter] >> So, I'm not the only developer on Mojo, trust me. I mostly an intern on the team that's helping out with obscure things. Um, but the second piece is the experience of having done it before. Right? And so, building Swift, I learned tremendous number of lessons about what to do that worked out well, but also what not to do. And so, the the tooling piece of this, the using your own product piece of this is actually really important. One of the big things that caused, for example, the IDE features and and many of the things we had problems with Swift is that we didn't really have a user. We were building it and we but before we launched, we had one test app that was kind of air quotes dog fooded, but not really. And so, we weren't actually using it in production at all and by the time it launched, it you could tell. Like the tools didn't work, was slow to compile, crashed all the time, lots of missing features. And so, with Mojo, you know, we consider ourselves to be the first customer. We have hundreds of thousands of lines of Mojo code. It's all open source. >> It's amazing. And so, that's a completely >> half a million, isn't it? It's like >> Yeah. Yes. Amazing. >> large. We're going to be open sourcing a lot more soon, too. But the but that approach is very different. And so, this is a product of experience, but it's also a product of like we're we're building Mojo to solve problems and so, we're learning from the past. We're we're taking best principles and if we're going to make a mistake, let's make a new mistake. And so, this is this is a big piece of it. Yeah, it's interesting. So, you know, my my background is um, so different, um, but wanting to achieve the same tight iteration loop is my number one goal as well. And it's interesting, you know, when you look at the history of the tools that I admire, it's Smalltalk, it's APL, it's Lisp, it's Mathematica. They're all environments where you have a a workspace, you know, or or >> You're you're manipulating the code. You have a symbol table. Yeah, and every line of code you run is manipulating objects inside that workspace. So, like with APL, you don't ship somebody the compiled piece of code, you ship somebody the state of the workspace when you're done. You know, you're typing at the repl, you're solving things, and then you're like, yeah, this is working nicely and you just that's what Emacs was, you know, Emacs originally was a a piece of It's kind of like your You're like pickling it and you're sending you're sending the pickle almost. Yeah, you know, when you when you start it was basically just pulling out, you know, what Richard Stallman's local RAM looks like at the point when he was like, okay, I'm happy with these sets of manipulations. And people don't realize Python is is that, you know, it's not that far from being a Lisp. People have done everything they can in the recent years to make it look like Java, you know, um, but it's not. You know, that's that's that's a fake. And actually, if you lean into these kind of Smalltalk Lisp roots, there's an extraordinary thing there. So, nowadays, for example, we have a really cool AI bot, um, rather unimaginatively called Discord Buddy, that sits in Discord and it has access to all of our GitHub repos and uh, indexed versions of all our Discord messages and our lawyers use it, our accountants use it. We have a whole professional services uh, subsidiary actually called Virtual, they all use it. And we just ask it questions about like, hey, you know, how does this fit into our strategy around that or can tell me about this particular client's most recent share of thing or whatever. Um, that is a piece of code we never deployed. Um, it's it's actually a live symbol table living in this piece of software we wrote called Solvent, um, where um, Eric, who who wrote Discord Buddy, just one after a time typed commands to like edit that symbol table, you know, to say like, okay, let's create a dictionary. Let's put this in here. Let's do this." And like, "Oh, that was a good set of things. Let's wrap that up into a function." That's And you just read it top to bottom. And when he wants to fix a bug or add a feature, he doesn't like pull it out and go here and go here and go here. He's just like, "Okay, I'm going to manipulate that route or that dictionary." And he does it and it's it's just there, you know? And and this way of working that you were you know, the really the first notable Yeah, it's going going. I was going to talk about nbdev. I just want to say you were like the first notable supporter of nbdev. Like you really understood this idea. Let me tell you something that I see in your work. Okay. So, because you you know, I do have many commonalities, right? And so, I'm basically reinventing stuff I built 15 years ago, but for the modern AI and GPU era. Uh you, what I see, you're you're taking lessons learned from Jupyter notebooks, which then inspired nbdev. nbdev is a really cool way of saying, "Let's build a Jupyter first development environment. Let's actually make it so you could do production development in notebooks and take advantage of all the real-time and steps. Exactly. And so, all the things you're talking about there. But now, what you're doing is you bring all those know- all that knowledge and all that experience forward to solve it. Where you're saying, "Let's actually solve a couple of new problems. One is take advantage of that category technology. Let's bring in LLMs and AI coding. And let's make it so people actually can build products while retaining mastery of their code. And learning as they go. Learning more and more. Exactly. And so, the work product there is not just the outcome, but it's also something you can work with, you can manipulate, you can maintain, you can evolve. I think this is what makes it to me so exciting and so fundamentally new. Because again, you can go back to the top of the discussion, there's so many entrenched interests that want to convince everybody in the world that coding is done, we shouldn't think about the same more. Like if you're not just vibe coding, then then you're doing it wrong. But in reality, okay, you're making a lot of disposable code. You don't know how anything works. You're not developing and growing as an engineer. You're not creating something with durable value. And I think to create something with durable value, you need to both get the benefit of AI coding. It's amazing for discovering and finding new ideas. It's amazing for uh teaching you new things. Like what is that new API? What is that that uh data structure I don't know? What is um what are what are four different ways of approaching this problem, right? But then get making sure that you own the result and actually can evolve it and work with it and be proud of it. Yeah, yeah. And we discovered this amazing thing that um when you when you you know, so previously I've always I always felt like I had a dialogue with the computer where I'm you know, so so supercharged REPL. I'm you know, typing in things and seeing results. Now I've got a third-person thing in this dialogue, which is the AI. And so, we've kind of developed this uh key rule behind everything we do with AI, which is the AI should be able to see exactly what the human sees. And the human should be able to see exactly what the AI sees at all times. And so then um Jeremy Reese has been writing his new book in Solve It. And he's the the the AI can see exactly you know, he writes of the book, but he's always asking the AI you know, like, "Hey, does this paragraph align with this mission that we did in the last paragraph? Or hey, have have we discussed this case study before? Or hey, can you go into my um editor's notes and check whether we have any comments on this thing?" And the AI doesn't need any claw.md file or whatever. Like it's it's there with you, you know? It's in the trenches doing doing the work and watching the progress. So, we've got this thing called um Shell Sage, um built by one of our great team members, Nate, who used to um co-run the LLM stuff at Stability AI. And he was like, "Okay, I'm going to take this idea and I'm going to put it into Bash into the shell." And it was like 100 lines of code. He was like, "Wait, tmux already shows everything that's happened. So, if I just add a command which you can type while you're using tmux that talks to an LLM, the LLM can see all of my previous commands, all of my previous questions, all of my output. This is amazing thing." He was like 100 lines of code and by the next day, all of us were using it all the time. Like so, we kind of found this like key thing behind how to work with AI that just so happens to perfectly fit with the nbdev kind of background now where it's like, yeah, bringing in a a co-worker who always is pairing with us cuz they'd always can see everything we're doing and why we're doing it. We also end up with better artifacts because >> so that it sounds like what you're doing is instead of bringing in a junior engineer that can just crank out code, you're bringing in a senior expert and you're a senior engineer advisor somebody that can actually help you make better code and teach you things. Yeah, we exactly we you know, so we still have some agentic pieces, you know, for the stuff that you know it's good at. So, sometimes we'll we'll you know, the other day we were like, "Okay, this is clearly a bug in Drupal here. It hasn't sent this thing across." And you just say like, "Hey, use your tools to go in and have a look to see what printed out this warning, what called that, why it called that, how you know?" And it came back and it said like, "Okay, >> [snorts] >> here it all is." I could have done it myself. Would have taken 15 minutes. Would have been boring and annoying. So, that was nice, you know? But then >> the the automation features of AI are super important, right? I mean, I think this is something where uh getting us out of writing boilerplate, getting us out of memorizing APIs, getting us out of uh you know, looking up that thing from Stack Overflow. I think it's really quite profound. I think this is this is a good use. Yeah. But the thing that I get concerned about is if you go so far to to not caring about what you're looking up on Stack Overflow and why it works that way and things like this and not learning from it, that's that's the concern. It it feels like we're going to have a bifurcation of skills because people who use AI the wrong way are going to get more and more And the people who do use it to learn more and learn faster are going to like they're going to outpace the speed of growth of AI capabilities because they're a human with the benefit of that. It's going to be interesting. I feel like there's going to be this group of people that have got a learned helplessness. And there's maybe a smaller group of people that everybody's like, "Oh, how is this person know everything? How are they so good?" you know? So, so to me, just like as I reflect on my my personality and how I work, um I don't watch the evening news. I don't you know, I I do doomscroll Twitter a little bit, but I don't I don't really uh sink myself in the social media and things like this. And so, there's so much of the noise of the world that's going on that I'm completely unaware of. And guess what? That makes me happier. But what it does is it frees up brain cell and brain capacity for other things. I don't care who who Elon's fighting with, trust me. Like that's not something that I really want to care about. Um but I think that AI coding can be the same thing, right? If if you get sucked into, "Okay, well, I need to figure out how to make this thing make me a 10x programmer." It may be a path that doesn't bring you to developing at all, right? It may actually mean that you're throwing away your own time cuz we only have so much time to live on this Earth, right? And so, what that can do is it can end up retarding your development and preventing you from growing and actually getting stuff done. And so, I think to your point earlier about the team and losing productivity, I think that what it would be great to do would be to actually have some kind of objective metric in terms of productivity and like, can we actually look at, okay, well, where where is this 10x benefit that's theoretically there coming from and who does it accrue to? And I think that maybe what we'll find out is that there's uh a very bimodal distribution. Like the people building prototypes, it is actually transformative. I actually totally believe that. Or the people who don't know code being able to get something done that they otherwise couldn't do, that is actually transformative. Completely convinced. But for other other kinds of programming, maybe it's not actually the thing that you should be aspiring to. And if we can actually define these things as two different terms, define these worlds, get some of the BS and the overhype out of the equation, and get people to be more rational about this, maybe we can find a better way to use the tools for what they're good at. And I think that could lead to a more productive and happier world for people. And we've done that before, right? Like I feel like we've had the same conversation about giant Excel spreadsheets and Microsoft Access databases and and VB scripts. And you know, folks in business groups quite correctly say like, "This has genuinely transformed our department." And people in IT genuinely say like, "That's great, but we can't run our whole company here on this." Well, okay. So, technology waves like cause massive hype cycles and over drama and oversell. And whether it be like object-oriented programming in the '80s, everything's an object versus uh the internet wave in the 2000s. And now, everything has to be online and otherwise, you know, you can't buy a shirt or something, right? Or dog food, right? I mean, there's truth to the technology, right? But what ends up happening as things settle out and it's less dramatic as as initially promised. And so, the question is is that when things settle out, like if you as a programmer, where do you stand? Like have you lost time? Have you lost years of your own development because you've been spending it the wrong way and now suddenly a rail is much further ahead of you in terms of being able to create productive value for the world. Right, I think that's the question. And so I do do expect some amount of correction. Also do expect the tools get way better and I do I don't think that we're done yet for sure. Right, but but the real question I think we all weigh is like how do we actually add value to the world? How do we actually do something meaningful? How do we move the world forward and and for me personally it's about how am I proud and happy and doing something that I feel like it's contributing. Yeah, and in the end like you and I enjoy the process of software craftsmanship and so we enjoy putting the time in and we enjoy getting better at it. I guess I feel like a lot of folks can enjoy that if they put in the time to get good at it, but not everybody has to for sure. I think Yeah, I respect people that are not into that. I mean this tool is reasonable to uh think about programming as just a means to an end. That's that's fine. And to that I would say if your end is building something that lives more than 6 months then you do care about the maintainability and the evolution of the software architecture. So there's a air quote business reason to do that. But I also admit that I don't program because I have to. It's definitely not my day job. You recently pointed out my GitHub history. It's like this is how you spell nights and weekends cuz all the green dots are on the weekends, right? But the um but you know, there's lots of reasons that different people can weigh these factors in different and what's right for them. Yeah, for sure. And I think your comment about the news and Twitter and stuff is pretty relevant here which is just you know, by choosing not to put yourself in environment where you've got all this sloshing over you all the time. You don't have to fight it, you know, because it's not being thrown at you. That's right. I'm I'm very much focused on taking the next hill. So that's what I'm always looking at and that's why I climb hills. Yeah, well you've done an amazing job of it Chris and I think uh I think it's actually quite clear now Mojo is going to be hugely successful. You just just raised how much money? I think other people are starting to understand this too. Yeah, we raised $250 million from some folks that believe in us very strongly. Yeah. So obviously I've believed in you since before you did. Um and it's great to see, you know, that other people are now seeing how successful this is going to be. Um Well, so I mean I would I would say that a couple of different ways. I mean this is all to plan of course and so raising money is an artifact of being able to build things and being able to be successful. And so it's a great validation and I'm very excited to work with these new folks. Um but honestly it's about building the right thing. And to me what I struggle with and again come back to software craftsmanship is that when you build a new programming language and I I agree with you now Mojo is inevitable. Yes, it will be open source. Yes, we're planning all this stuff and it will do amazing things for sure. Um but because of that I have a huge burden of responsibility. Like it will happen. And so the question is is it actually good or not? And so this is where design matters, architecture matters. This is where tools matter. This is where things fitting together and being able to evolve quickly and be able to make mistakes and fix them matters. And so this is why I care about building these things is because I do believe that the things we build can have an impact, but they can only have an impact if they're built well. And they don't have to be perfect of course. I'm sure Mojo will have its own mistakes and its own bugs and problems and that's guaranteed. But if we care then we can get closer to the mark and if we don't care then you're probably never going to get there. Look, it's built around a strategy and a vision and that's been consistent and that's you know, I think that's the key thing, you know, it's it's channeling where you you know, you've got an amazing team, but it's channeling the direction that you've figured out, you know, that you've spent years figuring out and so that's actually something I should put in a pitch for Eric Reese's upcoming book. Like this is kind of the key thesis of his is like people who lead projects need to be believed in, you know, and need to be given the room to keep at it and he's developed ways to make sure that happens. Um and I'm excited to read his book. Yeah, well I mean you've got it sorted out already, you know, you've you've you've been able to stick with your vision and it's clearly going to happen. So I'm really excited. Well, so I mean I think that that again goes both ways, right? So on the one hand um this is my life's work, right? I mean this is what I was put here to do and Mojo and Max and solving AI compute and making it so people can program all the chips and people have choice. Like this is this is what I'm about and I haven't been too shy about that. Um but on the other hand that doesn't mean everybody believes. And so that's okay with me. Like a lot of people haven't believed for various reasons whether be the angry person on Hacker News shaking their fist at whatever. Why don't I just use Julia? Oh, so much or or whether or whether be an employee that's like yeah, actually you know, I don't I don't believe in X and Y and Z and whatever and it's like okay, cool. This is the wrong place. There are other people that would love to join and so I'd love to work with them. And if you're the such a right fit then please leave because it's better for both of us. You know, it's about making sure that you're working with the people that can get to success and making sure they're rewarded and people can be a part of the success if they believe in it, but not trying to have to make everybody happy because trying to make everybody happy is how you get watered down committee things and you can't really make you know, a big bold bet if you do that. And so you have to actually as you say have a hypothesis. Have have have a core of belief and it may be directional. It may not have all the digits of precision, but you have to stick to it otherwise you won't get to it. Yeah, for sure. Well, thank you Chris. I think you know, so before we wrap up I just want to ask people watching that if you're interested in seeing the vision that I'm trying to create, please come along to solve.it.com and have a look. It's kind of crazy. It's very different, but it's really working. We've got so many people now that have literally said their life has changed dramatically for the better thanks to it. And definitely don't sleep on Mojo because it's got it's what we're all going to be using pretty soon. So Well, so and and Jeremy one of the things that I'm I'm fond of you for many reasons, but the your your generosity with your time. Not many people particularly with your background and your incredible talent and capabilities would spend their time building tools to teach people and allow them to grow. You've taught me so much. I feel very thankful to you for that. Um but a lot of other people wouldn't do that. And so I think that the the even trying to move the world forward in this place it can be very um isolating sometimes and there's always people that say you know, your ideas are terrible. I'm going to eat you blah blah blah. The world doesn't want X Y or Z. But that always happens. You should definitely not listen to those people because those are the people that aren't building anything themselves, right? >> No, exactly. And thank God now we have our community, you know, we've got what's you know, 4 million people that learned AI from fast.ai. They're still with us. A lot of them are running labs and stuff nowadays and they're in our Discord and they're you know, we support each other and we have a this really warm, encouraging, deeply skillful community and I think that's everybody needs people around them that Yeah. are supporting what they're doing. Um well, and and what I've seen across my career is I've seen people that you know, they might have been an intern for me 20 years ago now. Somehow this happens. Um but what I see is the story arc of different people's careers, their passions, where they drive. And the people that I see doing really well uh in their careers and in their lives and in their development are the people that are pushing. They're not complacent. They're not just doing what everybody tells them to do. They're actually asking hard questions and they want to get better. And so investing in yourself, investing in your your tools and techniques and really pushing hard so that you can understand things at a deeper level I think is really what enables people to grow and and achieve things that they maybe didn't think was possible a few years before. I couldn't agree more. Thank you Chris. It's so inspiring and I hope everybody takes it to heart. Thanks for your time today. Yeah, it's great to see you. All right. Cool. Now you got it.

