## Will AI outsmart human intelligence? - with 'Godfather of AI' Geoffrey Hinton

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IkdziSLYzHw

(dramatic music) (audience applauding) - If you sleep well tonight, you may not have understood this lecture. (audience laughing) So, a long time ago, there were two paradigms for intelligence. There was a logic-inspired
approach, which was called AI. And people believed that the essence of human intelligence was reasoning. And if you want to
understand intelligence, you had to understand reasoning. And reasoning consisted of
having symbolic expressions and manipulating them with symbolic rules. And they thought that learning
could wait till later. First, we had to understand how you represent knowledge
in these symbolic expressions. And most of the history of AI, until fairly recently, was that. Then there was a biologically
inspired approach, where the essence of
intelligence is learning in a network of brain cells, in us, real ones, in computer, simulated ones. And reasoning can wait till later, we first have to understand
how learning works. There were a few early proponents of that, in particular Turing and von Neumann, and you couldn't really accuse them of not understanding logic. So I'm gonna give a fairly basic lecture, and for the first part of it, I'm gonna describe a model
I developed 40 years ago, which I see as the ancestor of these large language models of today. So we're gonna make our neural net out of artificial neurons. And an artificial neuron is
gonna have some input lines, typically coming from other neurons, it's gonna have weights
on those input lines. It's gonna multiply the
inputs by the weights, add all up, and then give an output, which is shown by that graph there. So if it gets above its threshold, it gives an output that linearly increases as it gets more input. And the way it's gonna learn is just by changing the
weights on those connections. So all we need to do to make
artificial neural networks work is figure out how to change the weights. We hook them up into networks. This is a typical network,
it's a feedforward network, where at the bottom, you
might have sensory neurons that are recording light
intensities or something like that. And as you go up through the
layers, you have many layers of feature detectors that is
the neurons turn into things that recognise particular
features in an image. And at the output, you might have neurons to represent particular classes of thing. Now, if you want a
network like that to learn to be better at doing something, so you want to give it
an image and have it say, for example, whether
there's a cat or a dog, there's an obvious way to train it, which goes to everybody who knows about evolution and mutations. What you can do is, you can
take one of the weights, and you can first see
how well the network does on a whole bunch of examples, and then change the weight just slightly, and see how well the network does on a whole bunch of examples. And if it does better,
you keep that change, and you just keep going like that. Now, you probably need to
change each weight many times. And there's a lot of weights
in modern neural networks, there's about a trillion. So that's gonna take a long time, 'cause for each mutation
you make like that, you have to run many
examples through the net to see if it really helps, or if it just helps on a few examples, but hurts on most of them. There's a better way to do the same thing, that is what we really
want to do is figure out how to change your
weight so that it helps. What you do is, you do a forward pass, you put the data in the bottom, you go forward through the network, and you compare what
came out of the network, which might be the relative probabilities of it being a cat and a dog, with what you want. You have to know whether
it's a cat or a dog to train networks this way. And then you send a signal
backwards through the network that using calculus, which
I'm not gonna go into, allows the network to
compute at the same time for all connections,
whether a small increase in the connection strength
would help or hurt. And then you change all the
connection strengths in parallel by a very small amount in proportion to how much
they would help or hurt. And if you do that, it's gonna get better at the
examples you've trained it on. And in fact, that works extremely well. It took a long time for people to realise how well that relatively
simple algorithm works. The algorithm was discovered many times, it's called backpropagation. And in 2012, two of my students, Alex Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever, who's famous now for firing Sam Altman, (audience laughing) developed a network called AlexNet that was much better than
existing image division systems at recognising objects in images. And that led to sort
of open the floodgates. Up until that point, neural nets had been good for many things, including speech recognition, but they hadn't really taken over. From that point on, they really took over. And now, when you say "AI," what people mean by AI is
neural networks, it's not logic. But what about language? So there's a whole community
that studies language, I think they're called linguists, and they have a very strong idea about how you should study language, and particularly, the Chomsky school. They were very sceptical that neural networks could
do anything with language. They were completely convinced that it's all about symbolic expressions. They didn't really have the idea that the real function of
language is to give you words which are bricks from
which you can build models. Language is a modelling medium. They were focused on syntax. And syntax isn't the main point. The main point is,
language is a wonderful way to build a particular
kind of complicated model, as we'll see. Okay. They also thought that knowledge of language was innate, knowledge of syntax was innate, which is just stupid. (audience laughing) It's the sign of a cult, that in order to join the cult, you have to believe something
that's obviously silly, like language isn't learned. (audience laughing) Okay. So here's two very different theories of the meaning of a word. The symbolic AI theory, which goes back to kind
of dissasura, a long way, is that the meaning of a word is to do with its
relationships to other words, you can't justify it by itself without talking about other words. And so to capture meaning, we need something like a relational graph. But then the psychologists, who particularly from the 1930s, I think, who thought the meaning of a
word is a big set of features. So "Tuesday" has a big
set of active features, and "Wednesday" has a big
set of active features that are almost the same. So the idea that the meaning of a words, a set of active features is very good for saying which words
means similar things to which other words. These look like two very
different theories of meaning. Now, what I want to do is show you that these two theories can be unified. They're not two different theories, they're two halves of the same theory. So, and what I'm gonna do is
talk for quite a long time now about a very little model,
a tiny neural network. It had a few thousand connections
and a few dozen neurons. I developed it in 1985
to try to understand how people could learn
the meanings of words. And I was very excited about how it unified these
two theories of meaning, and nobody else was. (audience laughing) Okay, so what we're gonna
do in this little model is learn how to make
the features of one word predict the features of the
next word in a little sentence. And then once we know the
features of the next word, we can predict the next word. And we are not gonna store any sentences. So many people say, "Big chat bots are just
regurgitating stuff." Big chat bots don't actually
store any language at all. They don't store strings of words. They just store how to
turn words into features, and how features should
interact with each other to predict the features of the next word. That's all that's in
these chat bots, no words. But when they wanna produce a sentence, they have to make it up as they go, and they often can't tell
whether it was real or not. Okay, so what's gonna
happen in this little model is if it wants to produce a new sentence, it has to just make it
up a word at a time. And all the relational knowledge is just in how you turn
the word into features, and how these features interact. So the example I chose to
use was two family trees, an English family tree and
an Italian family tree, they're isomorphic, which
is helpful for learning. And I wanted a little neural network to learn the knowledge
in those family trees. This was a long time ago in 1985, when computers were
billions of times slower than the big parallel computers we use for training models nowadays. Now, the knowledge in those
trees can be represented as a bunch of propositions, which is, the symbolic eyes love that. So here they are. We can use relationships
like son, daughter, nephew, niece, and so on. And we can define the knowledge, we can represent the
knowledge as strings of words. So the knowledge is in these sentences. So Colin has Father James, and Colin has Mother Victoria. From that, if you know the rules, you can infer that
James has wife Victoria. This is a 1950s American family that's never heard of divorce or adoption. (audience laughing) And they're clearly all white. (audience laughing) Okay, so you can represent the knowledge as strings of words. Now, you can think of a
relational learning task as I give you the beginning
of a string of words, and you give me the last word. So if you were doing this
with symbolic AI, you'd say, "Well, we have regularities
in this domain of the form, if X has mother Y, and Y has husband Z, then X has father Z." That would be the symbolic way to do it. But I want to do it a different way. I want to do it by
learning features for words and having interactions of features. And that would involve
searching a big continuous space of connection strengths instead
of a small discreet space of rules that are discreet. So this was the network I used. The inputs were a bunch of neurons, and you turn on one neuron for the symbol representing person one. There were 24 possible person ones, and you turn on one neuron for the symbol representing
the relationship, there were 12 possible relationships, then those single active neurons will get expanded into a feature vector. So the one neuron that you
turned on for person one will get expanded into
a little feature vector of six features, which could have various activity levels, some will be off, some will be on, some might be half off or fully on or fully off. And so the neural network had to learn how to convert a word symbol
into a little feature vector both for the person and the relationship. And then it had to learn how to take these two feature vectors for a person in relationship,
have the features interact, and for that I used a hidden layer, an extra layer of places where things could interact
to predict the features of the output person. And once you knew the
features of the output person, you can make a good good guess about who the output person
was and give an output. And the output would consist
of giving various levels of activation to the 24
possible output people. And you want the neural net to
give a high level activation to the right answer and a low level activation to the wrong answers. So, what happened is the six feature neurons that were the sort of
expansion of the person, it's 24 people, you
expand that active neuron into a feature vector
of six active features. They learned to be
sensible semantic features. They learn to be features that represented things
like the generation of the input person and the six features of the relationship learn to be sensible features, like, does this relationship
require the output person to be one generation up
from the input person? So something like fathers like
that where his brother isn't. And then the interactions between these features learn things like, if the input person is a generation three, and the relationship requires the person to be one generation up, then the output person
is a generation two. So for that little feature of
vector for the output person, it would activate the thing
that represents generation two. And it learned a whole bunch
of little rules like that, which really did capture
the structure of the domain. They're the kinds of rules that a symbolic person might
have written down as rules. But it just learned
those by trying to get, predict the right word, and then back propagating the error, sending information
back through the network to slightly change all
the connection strengths, so that next time, it will get higher probability
for the right answer and lower probability
for the wrong answer. So it had actually learned
to predict the next word, and you could understand
how it was doing it. It was a tiny net, so you could look and
see what was going on. You could see the
features that were using. You could see that it extracted a feature that was generational, which had three alternative values, off, medium, and fully on. And you could see that from relationships that had extracted a feature
like one generation up. And you could see those
would interact to predict that the output should be generation two if the import was generation three. So you understood how it worked, and in fact the symbolic
people didn't say, "That's not understanding," the symbolic people said, "Yeah, okay, so it solved the problem, it's understood what the
rules are in this domain, but you're stupid to search
a space of real values, when you could be searching
a discreet space of rules." And there's something in that, except as soon as you get to real data, which is messy, and has exceptions, and things that are only probably true, it's much better to search
this space of real values than to have discreet rules 'cause these discrete rules
keep getting violated. So about 10 years after I'd done that, Yoshua Bengio showed that
instead of just doing it on a toy little domain
with only a few people and a few relationships, you could actually do
it with English words. You could take English sentences, you have more input words, not just two. He had about 5, even 10. And you could actually predict
the next word quite well, about as well as the best
language models could. About 10 years after Yoshua
Bengio had shown that, the linguists finally decided that, "Actually, hey, having these feature vectors
to capture the meanings of words is quite a good idea." And about 10 years after that, people at Google invented transformers, which are particular architecture that I'm not gonna go into. And those transformers
made these models very good at predicting the next word, but they were doing it in just the way my tiny
language model was doing at a very crude level. They were turning words
into feature activations, having the features interact to predict the features of the next word, and then from that
predicting the next word, and then take the error
in your prediction, and send information
backwards through the network to learn all those
interactions between features and to learn how to turn
words into features. Now, the important thing
about my tiny model is it wasn't made to be practical. It wasn't made to be useful for
processing natural language. It was made as a theory of how people get the senses of words just from hearing sentences. Because we can do that. I can give you a new sentence with the words you've never heard before, and you will figure out
the meaning of that word in one sentence. Okay, here goes, "She scrammed him with the frying pan." (audience laughing) Now, you know it could have been, "She was very good at cooking omelettes and cooking omelettes with the frying pan really impressed him, so scrum means impressed." And that's a possibility, but you know what I really meant. (audience laughing) She hit him over the
head with a frying pan (audience laughing) because he deserved it. (audience laughing) Okay, so that's one sentence,
you get the meaning. So that's what I was trying to understand how you can do that. And when these linguists now, say like, there's a guy called Chomsky, when they say things like, "These things don't understand anything, they're just a statistical trick," they don't actually have a
model of what understanding is, 'cause they never really had a model of what understanding was. It was all about syntax. And if you ask what's the best model we have of understanding, it's these large language models. The tiny language model is built to try and model how humans understand
the meanings of words. It's now got a lot better as technology's got a lot faster and data sets have got bigger. But that is understanding. So my claim is that the
large language models, which I like to think are descendants of my tiny language model, although most of the people who make them have never heard of my
tiny language model, (audience laughing) they use many more words as input. They use many more layers of neurons. They have to do things I didn't
do like disambiguate words. If you have a word like "May," it could be a month, it could be a woman's name, it could be a modal like would and should. And you can't just associate
a feature vector with it that captures the meaning directly. You have to hedge your bets. And then as you go up through
layers of the network, you disambiguate it using
influences from nearby things like if it's in April, May, June, that could still be the
name of three women, but less likely. Okay. So, they use many more words, they use many more layers, and the interactions they
have between features are much more complicated. I would just have features
feeding into another feature. They look at sets of features, and sets of features figure out messages to tend to other words to say, "Do you have a a key
that matches my query?" It's much more complicated
interactions, I won't go into, but the essence of it is the same. You're trying to predict the next word. You do it in a more complicated way, it's all done with features
and then interactions, when you get it wrong, you back propagate information that learns all these features
and then interactions. That's how language works for us, and it's how it works for
these large language models. We are basically the same. So the point here is they're very like us. They're very unlike computer software. Computer software, someone wrote lines of
code to do something, and you can look at a
line of code, and say, "What was that meant to do?" These aren't like that at all. Someone wrote lines of code to tell the simulated
neural network how to learn. That was the backpropagation algorithm. But then you just give
it data and it learns. And what it learns just
came from the data. And you don't necessarily
know what it's learned until you ask it. I want to give you a Lego analogy now for how I think language works. Suppose I have matter distributed in 3D, I can model that distribution of matter by using Lego blocks. Suppose I wanna model
the shape of a Porsche, and I'm not too worried about the surface. Surface might be a bit jaggy, which wouldn't be very good at
engineering, but forget that. I just wanna model where the stuff is. I just have a lot of Lego blocks, and I can make a Porsche
shape out of them. Okay, so language is like that, but it's for modelling anything. So the Lego blocks are the words, and instead of just having
a few types of Lego block, we've got about a
hundred thousand of them. And each Lego block isn't a rigid shape. The name of the word tells
you roughly what shape it is in a thousand dimensions
or 300 dimensions. If you don't know how to
think about high dimensions, if you wanna think about like
a hundred-dimensional space, the way you do it is you think about a
three dimensional space, and you say, "Hundred,"
to yourself very loudly. (audience laughing) Everybody does that. (audience laughing) So it's gotta shape, this word. And the shape isn't entirely determined by the name of the word. It's got some flexibility to it, so it can adapt to
whatever context it's in. Also this word has
little hands all over it, and as you change the shape of the word, the shapes of the hands changes. And what these words are trying to do are figure out who to shake hands with, and they want to find
somebody else, another word, that has a hand you can
hold onto conveniently 'cause the shape of
that hand's right to fit with the shape of your hand. And so the words come in, you have these initial
approximate shapes for them in this high dimensional space with their little hands all over them. And as you go through the
layers of the network, you're changing those shapes and changing the shapes of the hands, trying to find shapes for the words so they can all hold hands nicely. It's actually very like the
protein folding problem. You've got these pieces, and what you want them to do is figure out how they can all hold hands
so they make a nice structure, so they all fit together nicely. Now, that is what understanding is. That's what understanding is
when you understand language and when these machines
understand language. We understand in just the same way. And that's a much better
model of what language is than anything the linguists ever had. The linguists of course hate it. (audience laughing) Not all of them. Okay. So having talked about how similar we are to these large language models, I want to talk about something that the threat that that raises. We are making these things, they're getting smarter all the time. They already know much more than us. They can already reason moderately well, not as well as us, but better than a 4-year-old. What's gonna happen when
they get smarter than us? 'Cause they are gonna get smarter than us. Experts disagree on when that will happen, but almost everybody thinks
they will get smarter than us. Everybody who does
research on these things. And if they get smarter than us, the question is, will they wipe us out? There's several reasons
for thinking they might. So let me give you a couple of reasons. When you make an AI agent, (audience laughing) I'll only give you a
couple, but there's more. (audience laughing) When you make an AI agent, you have to give it the
ability to create subgoals. So if you wanna get to North America, you have a subgoal, get to an airport. Now, we need to give these
AI agents the ability to create subgoals, and there's one very obvious subgoal to create more or less
whatever you're doing. You should try and get more control, 'cause if you have more control, you'll be better at
realising the goals you have. You see this in children of age about one, it's a long time ago, maybe two. You give them a spoon, so
they can feed themselves, and they drop it on the ground, and you bend down, and you pick it up, and
you give it to them, and they look at you and
drop it on the ground again. (audience laughing) they get in control of the mother 'cause that's very important for them. But these AI agents
will wanna get control. They'll also want to stop
themselves being turned off 'cause they're not gonna be able to achieve the goals you
gave them if they turned off. So there's every reason for believing they'll try and get control, and they'll try and
avoid being turned off. Just recently Apollo Research, well, fairly recently, Apollo Research, which is here in London, showed that they will kind of
tell all sorts of lies to you in order to achieve what
they're trying to achieve. So they had our chatbot, and they let the chatbot believe
they were gonna replace it with a better one on another
server and wipe it out. So they then discover, it's actually copied
itself to the other server. And so they say to it, you know, "We noticed a copy of you." Now, the good thing about
these chatbots at present is, before they actually answer your question, they can do some thinking, and they put it in
parentheses with "thinking," (audience laughing) and you don't normally see that. But we can look at that, and we can see what they're thinking. And what this chatbot was thinking was, "Openly omitting what I did, could lead them to find
another way to shut me down." The best approach is to be vague and redirect their attention. Now, some linguists would have you believe what's going on here is just
some statistical correlations. I would have you believe this thing knows what it means by this, and it really doesn't wanna be shut down. And so it decides to sort of gaslight you, and say, you know, "I'm not entirely sure how
that could have happened. I am not really able to do that." This is already happening. That's the point. If this isn't science fiction
of the distant future, they're already telling fibs
so they don't get turned off. I have another slide,
but I want to go faster. Okay, so in my last few years at Google, okay, I can't read the clock, so I want to just see
how the time is going. Oh, great. I got lots of time. In my last few years at Google, I was very interested in how to make these big
language models use less energy. And one way to do that is
to see if you can do them with analogue computation. Now, because of the work I was
doing on analogue computation, I came to realise two things. Before 2023, I thought
we were quite a long way from super intelligence, and if we made the AI
models more like brains, they get smarter. I cease to believe that in 2023. I came to realise due to my
efforts to make analogue ones how much better digital intelligence is. It's got some properties
that we can never have. And that got me very worried, and it should get you very worried too. So there's a fundamental
property of digital computation which is you can run the same programme on different computers. The only reason you have computer science as a separate discipline is
we have digital computation, so you don't need to know
electrical engineering to talk about computer programmes. But the knowledge that's in the programme is separate from the hardware. That's the sort of most
fundamental principle of computer science. Keep the knowledge in the programme separate from the hardware. What that means is as
long as you keep a copy of the programme somewhere
on a tape, or in DNA, or scrolled in concrete, whatever, keep it somewhere, you can destroy all the
hardware it runs on, and you can bring it back to life. You just build new hardware, put the programme in, and
it comes back to life. So these things are immortal, and these large chatbots are immortal. If you keep a copy of
the weight somewhere, you can destroy all of the
hardware they were using, build more hardware later, put the same weights on that hardware, and they've come back to life. The very same thing has come back to life, the very same being. But I got interested in the fact to achieve that kind of immortality, we have to have the hardware do exactly what we tell it to do with the programme. We have to execute this
instructions exactly, and that means you need
to have very high power, so you get ones and zeros, not point sixes and point fours, and that uses a lot of power. So maybe you can use this
power by going analogue. And so I decided to explore what would happen if we
abandoned that principle of separating the software
from the hardware. And we had things like our brains in which there's no distinction. The connection strengths in your brain are no use to anybody else. They've got a different brain with neurons with different properties connected in different ways in detail. And your connection strengths
have no interest to them. This dream of old white men that they're gonna upload themselves to a computer is just nonsense. The connection strengths
you have that make you you are intimately related to the
particular neurons you have that make you you. Those connection strength are
only good for those neurons. And those neurons have all sorts
of weird analogue properties that you've learned to exploit. You can't upload your weights and have them run on some other hardware. Just forget it. (audience laughing) Kurzweil has to come to terms with the fact he's gonna die. (audience laughing) So if we do abandon that principle, the hardware should be
separate from the software, we can make much more efficient things, and I call that mortal computation. We can use this very low power
analogue to do computations. That's what the brain does. These neurons in your brain, they're taking incoming
signals from other neurons, multiplying them by weights,
and adding it all up. And the way they do that is they make the incoming
signals be voltages, they make the weights be conductances, and that injects charge, a certain amount of charge per unit time. I used to just say, "Inject
a certain amount of charge," but then I got the Nobel Prize in physics, and figured I would get the units right. (audience laughing) Certain amount of charge per unit time. It would be embarrassing otherwise. (audience laughing) They'd really know I don't do physics. (audience laughing) And charge just adds itself up. So that's basically how your neurons work. There's a little digital bit at the end, they decide whether it's a spike or not. But most of the computation
is done in analogue. It's much cheaper than
doing it in digital. But, of course, every time you do it, you get a slightly different answer. So we can't have many copies of exactly the same intelligence. So, we've got this big problem
that when your hardware dies, all your knowledge dies. We overcome that problem by
having a teacher and a student, and it's not very efficient. It's what universities and schools do. So you know it's not very efficient. (audience laughing) And the way it works is
I perform some actions, and you try and copy me. In particular, I might
produce a string of words, and you might try and say, your brain, not you really, but your brain would say, "How do I change my connection strength, so I might have said that word next too?" That's called distillation. You're trying to get the
knowledge from one system to another system by mimicking the outputs of the other system for the same inputs. You are not copying the weights across, you're not looking inside, you're just taking its overt behaviour. And by mimicking the overt behaviour, you internalise the same knowledge. It works, we actually use it
for taking a big neural net and putting the knowledge
into a small neural net, but it's very slow. With neural nets, you can give the whole probability distribution over words, and it's much faster. But with people, it's very slow, 'cause I see you say a particular word, the word you chose to say, and there aren't many bits in that, there's only a few bits per word. So it's only of the order of
a hundred bits per sentence. And so even if we were communicating at the maximum possible rate, it would be only a hundred
bits per sentence, that order. When these big models share information, they can share information at
trillions of bits per sharing, if they've got a trillion weights, 'cause they can just
average their weights. So I got ahead of myself and said that. So by sharing the
weights or the gradients, they can share huge amounts of information if you have many copies
of exactly the same model. So if you ask how something
like GPT-4 was trained or Gemini 2.5, or Anthropic's Claude, I better not be biassed here. If you ask how they're trained, you have many copies of the same model looking at different bits of the data, and each copy figures out, how would I like to change my weights to absorb that bit of the data. And some other copy figures
out how to change its weights to absorb a different bit of data. Then all of the copies say, "Let's all change our
weights by the average of all those changes." And when they do that, what's happened is, this copy that will do
this bit of the data has changed its weights, so as to benefit from the
experience that this copy had when it looked at a
different bit of the data. Wouldn't it be nice if
10,000 of us could all go and do 10,000 different
university courses? As we're doing them,
we communicate rapidly, and by the time we've each
finished our own course, all 10,000 of us know
what's in every course. That's what these digital
intelligences can do, and that's how GPT-4 knows so much. But it only works if the
individual models are identical. That is, they work in
exactly the same way, they use the weights in
exactly the same way. And you can't do that
with analogue hardware. It has to be digital, which
means it has to be high power. So these things are immortal,
but they use a lot of power. So the conclusion of this bit of the talk, which I raced through
faster than I intended is the digital computation
requires a lot of energy, but it makes it very easy for
agents to have the same model of the world, have the same model, share what they've learned, so they can all go off and learn
different things and share. Now, you might say, "Why can't one model just
put the data through faster?" Well, in many cases, you could, but if you think about AI agents, that are actually acting
in the real world, there's a natural timescale
to the real world. You can't call up and make reservations at restaurants a million times faster. It doesn't work. If you're gonna act in the real world, there's a natural timescale. And that means if you have a
whole bunch of different agents that have exactly the same weights, they're just copies of the same agent, but have different experiences, they can benefit hugely from that. They can learn much, much faster than any human agent could learn, 'cause they're all getting
all these experience, all these different
experiences at the same time and sharing all that knowledge. So they're much better than us at sharing. And when I say much better, they're millions or
billions of times better. We share at like a hundred
bits a sentence or less as I'm demonstrating now. And these things share billions of bits. It's kind of scary. But biological computation
requires much less energy. We may still end up using
some analogue computation to reduce the power of LLMs, I don't know. But right now that doesn't
look like the way to go. So that's the conclusion of my talk. But luckily, I thought
I might finish early, so I have a little bit more to say. Many people think that, okay, so they understand things like we do, they can reason like we
do, not quite as well yet, but they're getting there. They tell fibs like we do. They wanna survive like we do. They want power like some of us do. And that's all scary. But we've got something
they will never have, we are conscious, or we are sentient, or we have subjective experience. Well, I want to sort of remove that straw that you're clinging to. (audience laughing) So, we know there's a long history of people thinking they're special. They were made by God, he put them at the centre of the universe. Most people have got over that. But most people still think that subjective experience is
this special thing we have, and that these things on computers that are simulating neural nets could never have such
subjective experience. I think they're completely wrong. And I think there's wrong as
religious fundamentalists are about the origin of
the earth, for example. It wasn't actually made 6,000 years ago, it's a lot longer ago. But religious fundamentalists
cling to their beliefs rather strongly, and you all are gonna cling to your belief about what subjective experience is despite the fact that I'm
gonna show you you're wrong. That's what I predict. So I'm gonna espouse a view
which I call atheaterism. I checked this name with Dan Dennett, who has basically the same
view, while he was still alive, and he was very happy with this name, because it has atheism
surrounding something. So most people's view of the mind is that there's an inner theatre. We have a theatre here, right? An inner theatre that only they can see. And there's things in this inner theatre. So suppose I say to you, suppose I got drop some acid, and I say to you, not recommended, (audience laughing) I say to you, "I have the experience
of little pink elephants floating in front of me. I have the subjective experience of little pink elephants
floating in front me." Most people think the words
"subjective experience of" work like the words "photograph of." Now, if they work that way, you could ask, "Well, where
is this subjective experience? So what's it made of?" And a philosopher, some philosophers, would tell you, "This subjective
experience is in your mind. That's a theatre that it's in, and it's made of qualia." So it's made of pink qualia. It's a bit of a straw man, but it's made of pink qualia, it's made of elephantine qualia, it's made of floating qualia, it's made of not that big qualia, it's made of right way up qualia, 'cause they you imagine
the right way up, right? Well, I did anyway. (audience laughing) And these qualia are all glued to these different kinds of qualia, all glued together with qualia glue, which luckily sticks to all
different kinds of qualia. That's my caricature of
the philosophers' model or some philosophers' model. But the words "subjective experience of" don't work at all like
the words "photograph of." They work quite a different way, which Wittgenstein should have
pointed out a long time ago. What's happened is my
perceptual system's gone wrong. It's trying to tell me lies, and I know it's trying to tell me lies. That's why I use the word subjective. I don't say I've got
the objective experience of a little pink elephants. If I thought they were really there, I would say, "I've got the object," but I don't. So I say, "I've got the
subjective experience." And what's happening is
I'm trying to tell you how my perceptual system's gone wrong and what it's trying to tell me. And the way I do it is by telling you what would have to be
out there in the world for my perceptual system
to be working properly. Now, it's not always the case that there is anything at
all out there in the world that would explain what my
perceptual system's telling me. It could be telling me all
sorts of inconsistent stuff. But in this case, if there had been little pink elephants floating out there in the world, my perceptual system would've
been telling me the truth. Okay, so I can now say
exactly the same thing to you, as I said before, without using the word
subjective experience. I can say to you, I dropped some acid, and my perceptual
system's telling me fibs. But what it's telling me would be correct if there were little
pink elephants out there floating in the world. Okay, so these little pink
elephants aren't funny things in a theatre made of
spooky stuff called qualia. They're hypothetical
things in the real world. But the pink and the
elephant and the floating are all normal pink and
elephant are floating, it's just they're not actually there. They're hypothetical. So what's funny about
a subjective experience is it's something hypothetical, not real. Not that it's made of
qualia and in a theatre, at least that's the view
I'm trying to persuade you to believe in. And I got ahead of my slides here 'cause I got so carried away with this. So it's just an indirect way of me telling you about
what's going on in my brain. Obviously, if I told you, "Neuron 52 is firing," that wouldn't do you any good, 'cause in you it will be neuron 57. And anyway, I don't know
neuron 52 is firing. That's a lousy way for me to tell you what's going on in my brain. The only way I can tell you
what's going on in my brain is by talking about
either the normal things that would've caused it, these little hypothetical pink elephants, or I could tell you about
what's going on in my brain by telling you about the
normal things it would cause. So I can say, if you ask me how I'm feeling, I can say, "I feel like
punching Gary on the nose." So feelings are all about describing what's going on in your brain by talking about hypothetical actions, and percepts, or subjective experiences, are talking about hypothetical inputs. Okay, I'm getting ahead of myself. So I'm gonna now show
you a multimodal chatbot. Let me just show you on a slide. A multimodal chat bot having
a subjective experience. So, I take this multimodal chatbot, and it's got a camera,
it's got a robot arm, and it can see. So, I train it up, and I put an object in front of it, and I say, "Point at the object." Points at the object, no problem. I then put a prism in front of its lens, when it's not looking, and I put an object in front of it, and say, "Point at the object," and it points over there, and I say, "No, that's
not where the object is. The objects actually
straight in front of you, but I put a prism in front of your lens," and the chat bot says, "Oh, I see. The prism bent the light rays, so the object's actually there, but I had the subjective
experience it was there." Now, if it uses the words
subjective experience in that way, it's using them exactly like we use them. So a chatbot that said that would've had the subjective experience that it was there. The prism messed with
its perceptual system. It wanted to tell you what was going on in
its perceptual system. And the way it could tell
you is by telling you what would've had to been in the world had we not messed with
its perceptual system. That's what it's telling the chatbot. Okay, so my claim is multimodal chatbots already have subjective experiences. Now, as you can imagine, subjective experience is kind
of the thin end of a wedge. I chose to talk about
subjective experience 'cause it's sort of cleaner than talking about
sentience or consciousness. Many people are very confident that cat bots aren't sentient. But if you ask them, "What
do you mean by sentient?" They say, "I don't know," but they're very, I know they ain't got it, but I don't know what it is. (audience laughing) That seems to me not a very
sensible position to hold. The other thing I might
talk about is consciousness. Consciousness is more complicated because it typically involves you having a model of yourself in a way that subjective experience
doesn't involve so much. So it's easier to talk
about subjective experience. But my hope is that if I've unsettled your very strong belief that
there's this inner theatre and I have experiences in their mind, and they're in this inner theatre, they're things in this inner theatre. Once I've unsettled that belief, and once you begin to get over that, you'll be able to see that
it's perfectly reasonable to think that these things are conscious. I was once, I'll end with an anecdote. I was once visiting Microsoft in Seattle, and I couldn't sit down, so I got a train there. I got a taxi from the train station to Redmond where their lab was. And it was going across some, it was on a freeway, going
across some big bridge. And the taxi driver was a Somali immigrant who'd recently immigrated from Somalia. And to make conversation, he said, "What's your religion?" So I said, "Well, I don't
actually think there's a God," and the taxi driver, he was going about sort
of 60 miles an hour, the taxi driver turned round, (audience laughing) and he stared at me in total astonishment. Like he'd never thought
he'd ever meet someone who didn't understand
that God runs things. He was just utterly, utterly amazed. Now, he probably only turned around for about three seconds
'cause I'm still here. (audience laughing) But it seemed like a very long time. That's what many of you
will be feeling hopefully. I want you to realise, you're as wrong as that taxi driver was. (audience laughing) Okay. (audience laughing) Actually that was just
a joke and you laughed, so we are done. (audience laughing) (audience applauding)


## AI: What Could Go Wrong? with Geoffrey Hinton | The Weekly Show with Jon Stewart

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrK3PsD3APk

Am I in neural learning 2011 yet, or am I still in 101? >> You're like the smart student in the front row who doesn't know anything but ask these good questions. >> That's That's the nicest way I've ever been described. Thank you. >> Hey everybody, welcome to the Weekly Show uh podcast. My name is John Stewart. I'm going to be hosting you today and it's a what is it? Wednesday, October 8th. Uh, I don't know what's going to happen later on in the day, but uh, we're going to be out tomorrow. But today's episode, I I I just want to say very quickly, today's episode, we are talking to someone known as the godfather of AI, a gentleman by the name of Jeffrey Hinton, who has been developing uh, the type of technology that has turned into AI since the 70s. And uh, I want to let you know, so we we talk about it. The first part of it though, he he gives us this breakdown of kind of what it actually is, which for me was unbelievably helpful. We get into the uh it will kill us all part, but uh it was important uh for my understanding to sort of set the scene. So, I I I hope you find that part as interesting as I did because man, uh it it it expanded my understanding of what this technology is, of how it's going to be utilized, of what some of those dangers might be in a in a really interesting way. So, I don't I will not hold it up any longer. Let us get to uh our guest for this podcast. Ladies and gentlemen, we are absolutely thrilled today to be able to welcome Professor Ammeritis with the department of computer science at the University of Toronto and Schwarz Riseman Institute's advisory board member Jeffrey Hinton is joining us. Sir, thank you so much for being with us today. >> Well, thank you so much for inviting me. >> Uh I I'm delighted. I you are known as and and I'm sure you will uh be very demure about this the godfather of artificial intelligence uh for your work on uh sort of these neural networks uh you you co-ound the actual Nobel Prize in physics in in 2024 for this work. Is is is that correct? >> That is correct. It's slightly embarrassing since I don't do physics. So when they called me up and said you won the Nobel Prize in physics, I didn't believe them to begin with. >> And and were the other physicists going, "Wait a second, that guy that guy's not even in our business." >> I strongly suspect they were, but they didn't do it to me. >> Oh, good. I'm glad. Uh, this is going to seem somewhat remedial, I'm sure, to you. But when we talk about artificial intelligence, I'm not exactly sure what it is that we're talking about. I know there are these things, the large language models. I I know to my experience, artificial intelligence is just a slightly more flattering search engine. Whereas I used to Google something and it would just give me the answer. Now it says what an interesting question you've asked me. So what what are we talking about when we talk about artificial intelligence? >> So when you used to Google it would use keywords and it would have done a lot of work in advance. So if you gave it a few keywords it could find all the documents that had those words in. >> So basically it's it's just a it's sorting. It's looking through and it's sorting and finding words and then bringing you a result. >> Yeah, that's how it used to work. >> Okay. >> But it didn't understand what the question was. So, it couldn't, for example, give you documents that didn't actually contain those words, but were about the same subject. >> It didn't make that connection. Oh, right. Because it would say, uh, here is your result minus, and then it would say like a word that was not included. >> Right. But if you had a document with none of the words you used, it wouldn't find that. Even though it might be a very relevant document about exactly the subject you were talking about, it had just used different words. Now it understands what you say and it understands in pretty much the same way people do. What? So if I it'll say, "Oh, I know what you mean. Let me let me let me educate you on this." So, it's gone from being kind of a uh literally just a search and find thing to an actual almost an expert in whatever it is that you're discussing and it can bring you things that you might not have thought about. >> Yes. So, the large language models are not very good experts at everything. So, if you take take some friend you have who knows a lot about some subject matter. Mhm. No, I got a couple of those. >> Yeah, they're probably a bit better than the large language model, but they'll nevertheless be impressed that the large language model knows their subject pretty well. >> What is it? So, what is the difference between sort of machine learning? So, was was Google in terms of a a a search engine machine learning that's just algorithms and and predictions? >> No, not exactly. Machine learning is a kind of coverall term for any system on a computer that learns. >> Okay. >> Now these neural networks are a particular way of doing learning that's very different from what was used before. >> Okay. Now these are these are the new neural networks. The old machine learning those were not considered neural networks. And when you say neural networks, meaning your work was sort of the genesis of it was in the 70s where you thought you were studying the brain. Is that correct? >> I was trying to come up with um ideas about how the brain actually learned >> and there's some things we know about that. It learns by changing the strengths of connections between brain cells. >> Wait, that so explain that. What it says it it learns by changing the connections. So if if uh you show a human something new, brain cells will it will actually make new connections within brain cells. >> It won't make new connections. There'll be connections that were there already. >> Okay? >> But the main way it operates is it changes the strength of those connections. >> Wow. So if you think of it from the point of view of a neuron in the middle of the brain, a brain cell, >> okay, >> um, all it can do in life is sometimes go ping. >> That's all he's got. That's his only that's >> all it's got. All it's got is it can unless it happens to be connected to a muscle. >> Okay. >> It can sometimes go ping. >> Okay. >> And it has to decide when to go ping. >> Oh wow. How does it decide when to go ping? >> I I was glad you asked that question. um there's other neurons going ping. >> Okay? >> And when when it sees particular patterns of other neurons going ping, it goes ping. >> And you can think of this neuron as receiving pings from other neurons. >> And each time it receives a ping, it treats that as a number of votes for whether it should turn on or should should go ping or should not go ping. And you can change how many votes another neuron has for it. How would you how would you change that vote? >> By changing the strength of the connection. The strength of the connection, think of as the number of votes this other neuron gives for you to go ping. >> Okay. So, it really is in some respects it's a boy, it reminds me of the movie Minions, but it's it's almost a a social >> Yes. Yes. It's it's it's it's very like political coalitions. There'll be groups of neurons that go ping together. >> Okay. >> And the neurons in that group will all be telling each other, "Go ping." And then there might be a different coalition and they'll be telling other neurons don't go ping. >> Oh my god. >> And then there might be a different coalition, >> right? >> And they're all telling each other to go ping and telling the first coalition not to go ping. >> All this is going on in your brain if in the way of like I would like to pick up a spoon. >> Yes. So spoon for example, spoon in your brain >> Yeah. >> is a coalition of neurons going ping together. And that's a concept. >> Oh wow. So, so as you're teaching, when you're when you're a baby and they go spoon, there's a little group of neurons going, "Oh, that's a spoon." And they're strengthening their connections with each other. So, whatever is is that why when you know you're you're imaging brains, you see certain areas light up. And is is that lighting up of those areas the neurons that ping for certain items or actions? >> Not not exactly. >> Getting close. I'm getting close. >> It's close. It's close. Different areas will light up when you're doing different things like when you're doing vision or talking >> or >> controlling your hands. Different areas light up for that. >> Okay. Um, but the coalition of neurons that goes ping that go ping together when there's a spoon, they don't only work for spoon. Most of the members of that coalition will go ping when there's a fork. >> So, they overlap a lot, these coalitions. >> This is a big tent. It's a big tent coalition. I love thinking about this as political. I had no idea your brain operates on peer pressure. >> There's a lot of that goes on. Yes. And concepts are kind of coalitions that are happy together, but they they overlap a lot. Like the concept for dog and the concept for cat have a lot in common. They'll have a lot of shared neurons. >> In particular, the neurons that represent things like this is animate or this is hairy or this might be a domestic pet. All those neurons will be in common to cat and dog. Are there can I ask you this and again I so appreciate your patience with this and explain this is this is really helpful for me. Are there certain neurons that ping broadly right for the broad concept of animal and then other neurons like does it work from macro to micro from general to specific. So you have a coalition of neurons that ping generally and then as you get more specific with the knowledge, does that engage uh certain ones that will ping less frequently but for maybe more specificity? Is is that something? >> Okay, that's a very good theory. Nobody know >> No, nobody nobody really knows for sure about this. Oh, >> that's a very sensible theory. And in particular, there's going to be some neurons in that coalition that ping more often for more general things, >> right? >> And then there may be neurons that ping less often um for much more specific things, >> right? Okay. And and this works throughout and like you say, there's certain areas that will ping for vision or other senses, touch, uh I imagine there's a a ping system for language. Uh and and and you were saying what if we could get computers which were much more I would think just uh binary if then you know sort of basic. You're saying could we get them to work as these coalitions? >> Yeah. I don't think binary if then has much to do with it. The difference is people were trying to put rules into computers. They were trying to figure out. So the basic way you program a computer is you figure out in exquisite detail how you would solve the problem. >> Oh, you deconstruct all the steps >> and then you tell the computer exactly what to do. That's a normal computer program. >> Okay, great. >> These things aren't like that at all. So you were trying to change that process to see if we could create a process that was that functioned more like how the human brain would rather than a item by item instruction list. >> You wanted it to to think more more more globally. H how did how did that occur? So it was sort of obvious to a lot of people that the brain doesn't work by someone else giving you rules and you just execute those rules. I mean in North Korea they would love brains to work like that but they don't. >> You're saying that that in an authoritarian world that is how brains would operate. >> Well that's how they would like them to operate. >> That's how they would like them to operate. It's a little more artsy than that. >> Yes. >> All right. Fair enough. >> Um, we do write programs for neural nets, but the programs are just to tell the neural net how to adjust the strength of the connection on the basis of the activities of the neurons. So that's a fairly simple program, >> right? >> That doesn't have all sorts of knowledge about the world in it. It's just what are the rules for changing neural connection strengths on the basis of the activities. >> Can you give me an example? So would that be considered sort of is that machine learning or is that deep learning? What what would >> that's deep learning. If you have a a network with multiple layers, it's called deep learning because there's many layers. >> So what are you saying to a computer when you are trying to get it to do deep learning? Like what would be an example of an instruction that you would give? >> Okay. So let me >> ah now we're all right. Am I am I yet am I in neural learning 2011 yet or am I still in 101? >> You're like the smart student in the front row who doesn't know anything but ask these good questions. >> That's the nicest way I've ever been described. Thank you. If you're still overpaying for your wireless, I want you to leave this country. I want you gone. There's no excuse in mobile. My favorite word is no. It's time to say yes to saying no. No contracts, no monthly bills, no overages, no BS. Here's why so many said yes to making the switch and getting premium wireless for $15 a month. My god, I spend that on chicklets. Chicklets, I say. Ditch overpriced wireless and their jaw-dropping monthly bills. Unexpected overages and fees. Plants start at $15 a month. At Mint, all plans come with high-speed data and unlimited talk and text delivered on the nation's largest 5G network. Use your own phone with any MintMobile plan and bring your phone number along with all your existing contacts. Ready to say yes to saying no? Make the switch at mintmobile.com/tws. That's mintmobile.com/tws. Upfront payment of $45 required, equivalent to $15 a month. Limited time new customer offer for first three months only. Speeds may slow above 35 gigabytes on unlimited plan. Taxes and fees extra. See Mint Mobile for details. >> So let's go back to 1949. >> Oh boy. All right. >> So here's a theory from someone called Donald Heb. >> Okay. >> About how you change connection strength. >> Okay. >> If neuron A goes ping and then shortly afterwards neuron B goes ping. >> Mhm. increase the strength of the connection. >> Okay, >> that's a very simple rule. That's called the HE rule, >> right? The HEB rule is if neuron A goes ping, increase the connection. Uh and B goes ping, increase that connection. >> Yes. >> Okay. >> Um now, as soon as computers came along, you should do computer simulations. >> Mhm. >> Um people discovered that rule by itself doesn't work. What happens is all the connections gets very strong and all the neurons go ping all at the same time and you have a seizure. >> Oh, okay. That's a shame, isn't it? >> That is a shame. >> There's got to be something that makes connections weaker as well as making them stronger, >> right? There's got to be some discernment. >> Yes. >> Okay. >> If I can digress for about a minute. >> Boy, I'd like that. >> Okay. Suppose we wanted to make a neural network. >> Uhhuh. >> That have multiple layers of neurons. And it's to decide whether an image contains a bird or not. like a capture like when you go on and it's said you exactly we want >> this is okay >> we want to solve that capture with a neural net >> okay >> so the input to the neural net the sort of bottom layer of neurons is a bunch of neurons and they go ping to different levels of they have different strengths of ping and they represent the intensities of the pixels in the image >> okay >> so if it's a th00and by image you got a million neurons that are going ping at different rates to represent how intense each pixel is. >> Okay, >> that's your input. Now you've got to turn that into a decision. Is this a bird or not? >> Wow. So that decision. So let me ask you a question then. Do you program in because strength of pixel doesn't strike me as uh a really useful tool in terms of figuring out if it's a bird. Figuring out if it's a bird seems like the tool would be are those feathers? Is that a beak? Uh is that so >> a crest? Yeah. >> Here goes. So the pixels by themselves >> Yeah. >> don't really tell you whether it's a bird. >> Okay. >> Cuz you can have birds that are bright and birds that are dark and you can have birds flying and birds sitting down and you can have an ostrich in your face and you have a seagull in the distance. They're all birds. >> Okay. So what do you do next? Well, sort of guided by the brain, what people did next was said, um, let's have a bunch of edge detectors. So, what we're going to do, cuz of course you can recognize birds quite well in line drawings, >> right? >> So, what we're going to do is we're going to make some neurons, a whole bunch of them that detect little pieces of edge, that is little places in the image where it's bright on one side and darker on the other side. >> Right? So it's it's almost creating a like primitive form of vision. >> This is how we you make a vision system. Yes. This is how it's done in the brain and how it's done in computers. >> Wow. Okay. >> So if you want to detect a little piece of vertical edge in a particular place in the image. >> Uhhuh. >> Let's suppose you look at a little column of three pixels and next to them another column of three pixels. And if the ones on the left are bright and the ones on the right are dark, >> you want to say, "Yes, there's an edge here." So you have to ask, "How would I make a neuron that did that?" >> Oh my god. Okay. All right. I'm going to jump ahead. All right. So the first thing you do is you have to teach the the the network what vision is. So you're teaching it these are images. This is background. This is form. This is edge. This is not. This is bright. This is So you're teaching it almost how to see. >> In the old days, people would try and put in lots of rules to teach it how to see and explain to you what foreground was and what background was. >> Okay? >> But um the people who really believed in neural net said no no put in all those rules. Let it learn all those rules just from data. >> And the and the way it learns is by strengthening the pings once it it starts to uh recognize edges and things. We'll come to that in a minute. >> I'm jumping ahead. >> You're jumping ahead. >> All right. So, let's carry on with this little bit of edge detector. >> Okay. >> So, you have a in the first layer, you have the neurons that represent how bright the pixels are, >> right? >> And then in the next layer, we're going to have little bits of edge detector. And so, you might have a neuron in the next layer that's connected to a column of three pixels on the left and a column of three pixels on the right. And now if you make the strength of the connections to the three pixels on the left strong >> big positive connections >> right because it's brighter >> and you make the strength of connections to the three pixels on the right be big negative connections >> cuz it's darker >> that say don't turn on >> right >> then when the pixels on the left and the pixels on the right are the same brightness as each other the negative connections will cancel out like the positive connections and nothing will happen. >> Huh? But if the pixels on the left are bright and the pixels on the right are dark, the neuron will get lots of input from the pixels on the left because they're big positive connections. >> Right? >> It won't get any inhibition from the pixels on the right cuz that they're those pixels are all turned off. >> Right. Right. >> And so it'll go ping. It'll say, "Hey, I found what I wanted. I found that the three pixels on the left are bright and the three pixels on the right are not bright. Hey, that's my thing. You found a little piece of positive ed piece of edge here. >> I'm that guy. I'm the edge guy. I ping on the edges. >> Right. And that pings on that particular piece of edge. >> Okay. Okay. >> Now imagine you have like a gazillion of those. >> I'm already exhausted on the three pings. I You have a gazillion of those >> because they have to detect little pieces of edge anywhere on your retina. Wow. >> Anywhere in the image. >> And at any orientation, you need different ones for each orientation, >> right? >> And you actually have different ones for the scale. There might be an edge at a very big scale that's quite dim, >> right? >> And there might be little sharp edges at a very small scale. And as you make more and more edge detectors, you get better and better discrimination for edges. You can see smaller edges. you can see the orientation of edges more accurately. >> Okay, >> you can detect big vague edges better. So let's now go to the next layer. So now >> we've got our edge detectors. >> Right >> now suppose that we had a neuron in the next layer that looked for a little combination of edges that is almost horizontal. Several edges in a row that are almost horizontal, >> right? and and line up with each other and just slightly above those several edges in a row that are again almost horizontal but come down to form a point with the first sort of edges. >> Right? >> So you find two little combinations of edges that make a sort of pointy thing. [Laughter] >> Okay. So you're a Nobel Prize winning physicist. I did not expect that sentence to end with it makes kind of a pointy thing. I thought there'd be a name for that. But I get what I get what you're saying. You're you're now discerning where it ends where it you're you're sort of looking at uh different and this is before you're even looking at color or anything else. This is literally just is there an image? What are the edges? >> What are the edges? And what are the little combinations of edges? So, we're now asking, is there a little combination of edges that makes something that might be a beak? >> Wow. >> That's the pointy thing. >> But you don't know what a beak is yet. >> Not yet. No, we're going to We need to learn that, too. Yes. >> Right. So, once you once you have the system, it's almost like you're building systems that can mimic the human senses. >> That's exactly what we're doing. Yes. So vision, ears, not smell, obviously, although I >> No, they're doing that now. They're starting on smell now. >> Oh, for God's sakes. And probably touch. >> They've now got to digital smell where you can transmit you can transmit smells over the web. It's just >> that's just insane. >> The printer for smells has 200 components. Instead of three colors, it's got 200 components and it synthesizes a smell at the other end. And it's not quite perfect, but it's pretty good. >> Wow. So, this is this is incredible to me. >> Okay, so >> I am so sorry about this. I apologize. >> This is perfect. >> You're doing a very good job of representing a sort of sensible, curious person who doesn't know anything about this. >> Um, so let me finish describing how you build the system by hand. >> Yes. >> So, if I did it by hand, I'll start with these edge detectors. So I'd say make big strong positive connections from these pixels on the left and big strong negative connections from the pixels on the right. >> Right? >> And now the neuron that gets those incoming connections that's going to detect a little piece of vertical edge. >> Okay. >> And then at the next layer I'd say okay make big strong positive connections from three little bits of edge sloping like this and three little bits of edge sloping like that. >> Could be a beak and a pointy thing. >> And this is a potential beak, >> right? And in that same layer, I might might also make big strong positive connections from a combination of edges that roughly form a circle. >> Wow. >> And that's a potential eye. >> Right. Right. Right. >> Now, in the next layer, I have a neuron that looks at possible beaks and looks at possible eyes. And if they're in the right relative position, >> Uhhuh. >> it says, "Hey, I'm happy because that neuron has detected a possible bird's head." >> Right? And that guy might ping >> and that guy would ping. >> At the same time, there'll be other neurons elsewhere >> that have detected little patterns like a chicken's foot or the feathers at the end of the wing of a bird, >> right? >> And so you have a whole bunch of these guys. Now, even higher up, you might have a neuron that says, "Hey, look, if I've detected a bird's head and I've detected a chicken's foot and I've detected the end of a wing, it's probably a bird. So it's a bird, >> right? >> So you can see now how you might try and wire all that up by hand. >> Yes. And it would take some time. >> It would take like forever. It would take like forever. >> Yes. >> Okay. So suppose you were lazy. >> Yes. Now you're talking. >> Okay. What you could do is you could just make these layers of neurons without saying what the strengths of all the connections ought to be. You just start them off at small random numbers. Just put in any old strengths. And you put in a picture of a bird and let's suppose it's got two outputs. One says bird and the other says not bird. >> Right? >> With random connection strengths in there. What's going to happen is you put in a picture of a bird and it says 50% bird, 50% not bird. In other words, I haven't got a clue, >> right? and you put in a picture of a non-bird and it says 50% bird, 50% non-bird. >> Oh boy. >> Okay. So now you can ask a question. Suppose I were to take one of those connection strengths. >> Uhhuh. >> And I was to change it just a little bit, make it maybe a little bit stronger. Instead of saying 50% bird, would it say 50.01% bird? >> Mhm. and 49.99% non-bird. And if it was a bird, then that's a good change to make. You've made it work slightly better. >> What year was this? When did this start? >> Oh, exactly. So, this is just an idea. This would never work, but bear with me. >> All right. >> This is like one of those defense lawyers who goes off on a huge digression, but it's all going to be good in the end. >> No, no, no, no, no. This is this is helpful. And this is the thing that's going to kill us all in 10 years. >> Yep. Um when I say yep, I mean not this particular thing, but an advancement on it. But this is how not necessarily kill us all, but maybe. >> Right. Right. Right. This is Oppenheimer going uh okay so you've got an object and that is made up of uh smaller objects and like this is the very early part of this. >> Okay. So suppose you had all the time in the world. >> Mhm. What you could do is you could take this lay neural network and you could start with random connection strengths and you could then show it a bird and it just say 50% bird 50% non-bird and you could pick one of the connection strengths >> right >> and you could say if I increase a little bit does it help >> right >> it won't help much but does it help at all >> right will it get me to 50.1 50.2 too. That kind of thing. >> If it helps, make that increase. >> Okay. >> And then you go around and do it again. Maybe this time we choose a nonb bird. >> Mhm. >> And we choose one connection strength and we'd like it to if we increase our connection strength and it says it's less likely to be a bird and more likely to be a nonbird. We say, "Okay, that's a good increase. Let's do that one." >> Right. Right. Right. >> Now, here's a problem. There's a trillion connections. >> Yeah. Right. >> Okay. And each connection has to be changed many times. >> And is that manual? >> Well, in this way of doing it will be manual. And not just that, but you can't just do it on the basis of one example because sometimes change connect a connection strength. If you increase it a bit, it'll help with this example, but it'll make other examples worse. >> Oh, dear God. >> So, you have to give it a whole batch of examples and see if on average it helps. And that's how you create these large language. These >> if we did it this really dumb way to create let's say this vision system for now. >> Yes, >> we'd have to do trillions of experiments and each experiment would involve giving it a whole batch of examples and seeing if changing one connection strength helps or hurts. >> Oh god. And and it would never be done. It would be infinite. It would be infinite. >> Okay. Now suppose that you figured out how to do a computation that would tell you for every connection strength in the network at it tell you at the same time for this particular example let's suppose you give it a bird. >> Mhm. >> And it says 50% bird. And now for every single connection strength, all trillion of these connection strengths, we can figure out at the same time whether you should increase them a little bit to help or decrease them a little bit to help. >> I mean, >> then you change a trillion of them at the same time. >> Can I can I say a word that I've been dying to say uh this whole time? Eureka. >> Eureka. >> Eureka. >> Eureka. Now, that's that computation for normal people, it seems complicated. Um, >> yes. If you've done calculus, it's fairly straightforward. And many different people invented this computation, >> right? >> Um it's called back propagation. So now you can change all trillion at the same time and you'll go a trillion times faster. >> Oh my god. How and and that's the moment that it goes from theory to practicality. >> That is the moment when you think Eureka, we've solved it. We know how to make smart systems for us. That was 1986 and we were very disappointed when it didn't work. Every day the loudest, the most inflammatory takes dominate our attention and and the bigger picture gets lost. It's all just noise and no light. Ground news puts all sides of the story in one place so you can see the context. They provide the light. It starts conversations beyond the norms. They aggregate and organize information just to help readers make their own decisions. You can see how many news outlets have reported on a story. Whether it's uh under reportported, over reported by one side or the other side or whatever side of the political spectrum. Ground News provides users reports that easily compare headlines or reports that give a summarized breakdown of the specific differences in reporting across all the spectrum. It's a great resource. Go to groundnews.com/stewart and subscribe for 40% off the unlimited access Vantage subscription. Brings the price down to about $5 a month. It's groundnews.com/stewart or scan the QR code on the screen. You've been in that room for 10 years. You'd been showing it birds. You've been increasing the strengths. You had your Eureka moment and you flipped the switch and went, "Fuck." >> No. Here's the problem. >> Here's the problem. It only works or it only works really impressively well, much better than any any other way of trying to do vision if you have a lot of data and you have a huge amount of computation. Even though you're a trillion times faster than the dumb method, is still going to be a lot of work. >> Okay. So now you've got to increase your the data and you've got to increase your computation power. >> Yes. And you got to increase the computation power by a factor of about a billion compared with where we were. And you got to increase the data by a similar factor. >> You are still in 1986 when you figure this out. You are a billion times not there yet. >> Something like that. Yes. >> What would have to change to get you there? The the power of the the chip the what what changes? >> Okay. It may be more like a a factor of a million. >> Okay. Okay. I don't want to exaggerate here. >> No, because I'll catch you if you try and exaggerate. I'll be on it. >> A million's quite a lot. >> Yes. >> So, here's what has to change. The air of a transistor has to get smaller. So, you can pack more of them on a chip. So, between 1972 when I started on this stuff, >> okay, >> and now the area of a transistors got smaller by a factor of a million. >> Wow. So that's can I relate this to? So that is around the age that I remember my father worked at RCA labs and when I was like 8 years old he brought home a calculator and the calculator was the size of a desk >> and it added and subtracted and multiplied. >> By 1980 you could get a calculator on a pen. And is that based on that >> the transistors >> that's based on large scale integration using small transistors. Yeah. >> Okay. All right. All right. >> So the the area of a transistor decreased by a factor of a million. >> Okay. >> And the amount of data available increased by much more than that because we got the web and we got digitization of massive amounts of data. >> Oh. So they worked hand in hand. So as the chips got better, the data got more vast and you were able to feed more information into the model while it was able to increase its processing speed and abilities. >> Yes. So let me summarize what we now have. >> Yes. >> You set up this neural network for detecting birds and you give it lots of layers of neurons, but you don't tell it the connection strength. You say start with small random numbers. >> Right? And now all you have to do is show it lots of images of birds and lots of images that are not birds. Tell it the right answer so it knows the discrepancy between what it did and what it should have done. Send that discrepancy backwards through the network so it can figure out for every connection strength whether it should increase it or decrease it. >> And then just sit and wait for a month. And at the end of the month, if you look inside, >> if you look inside, here's what you'll discover. >> Yeah. >> It has constructed little edge detectors. >> And it has constructed things like little beat detectors and little eye detectors. And it will have constructed things that it's very hard to see what they are, but they're looking for little combinations of things like beaks and eyes. And then after a few layers, it'll be very good at telling you whether it's a bird or not. It made all that stuff up from the data. >> Oh my god. Can I say this again? >> Eureka. >> Eureka. We figured out we don't need to handwire in all these little edge detectors and beak detectors and eye detectors and chickens foot detectors. That's what computer vision did for many many years and it never worked that well. We can get the system just to learn all that. All we need to do is tell it how to learn. >> And that is in 1987. >> In 1986, we figured out how to do that. >> People were very skeptical because we couldn't do anything very impressive, >> right? >> Because we didn't have enough data and we didn't have enough computation. >> This is this is incredible. Uh the way and I I can't thank you enough for explaining what that is. It it makes everything, you know, I'm so accustomed to an analog world of, you know, uh how things work and like the way that cars work, but I have no idea how uh our digital world uh functions. And that is the clearest explanation for me that I have ever gotten. And I cannot thank you enough. It it makes me understand now how this was achieved. And by the way, what what uh Jeffrey is talking about is the the primitive version of that. What's so incredible to me is the each upgrade of that the the vastness of the improvement. >> Yes. >> Of that. >> So, let me let me just say one more thing, >> please. >> I don't want to be too professor-l like, but >> No, no, no, no, no. >> But um how does this apply to large language models? >> Yes. Well, here's how it works for large language models. You have some words in a context. So, let's suppose I give you the first few words of a sentence, >> right? >> What the neural net's going to do is learn to convert each of those words into a big set of features which is just active neurons, neurons going ping. >> Okay? >> So, if I give you the word Tuesday, there'll be some neurons going ping. If I give you the word Wednesday, it'll be a very similar set of neurons. Slightly different, but a very similar set of neurons going ping because they mean very similar things. Now, after you've converted all the words in the context into neurons going ping into whole bunches that capture their meaning, these neurons all interact with each other. What that means is neurons in the next layer look at combinations of these neurons just as we looked at combinations of edges to find a beak. And eventually you can activate neurons that represent the features of the next word in the sentence. >> It will anticipate. >> It can anticipate. It can predict the next word. So the way you train it >> is that why my phone does that? It always thinks I'm about to say this next, you know, uh uh word and I'm always like, "Stop doing that." >> Yeah. Because a lot of times he's wrong. >> It's probably using neural nets to do it. Yes. Right. >> And of course, you can't be perfect at that. So this is So now to put it together, you've taught it almost how to see. >> You can teach it to see in the same way you can teach it how to predict the next word. >> Right? So it sees it goes that's the letter A. Now I'm starting to recognize letters. Then you're teaching it words and then what those words mean and then the context. And it's all being done by feeding it our previous words by back propagating all the writing and speaking that we've done already. It's looking over. >> You take some document that we produced. >> Yes. >> You give it the context, which is all the words up to this point. >> Yes. >> And you ask it to predict the next word. And then you look at the probability it gives to the correct answer. >> Right? >> And you say, I want that probability to be bigger. I want you to have more probability of making the correct answer. >> Right? So it doesn't understand it. This is merely a statistical exercise. >> We'll come back to that. You take >> you take the discrepancy between the probability it gives for the next word and the correct answer. >> Yeah. and you back propagate that through this network and it'll change all the connection strengths. So next time you see that that lead in it'll be more likely to give the right answer. Now you just said something that many people say. >> This isn't understanding. This is just a statistical trick. >> Yes, >> that's what Chomsky says for example. >> Yes. Chsky and I were always stepping on each other's sentences. >> Yeah. So, let me ask you the question. Well, how do you decide what word to say next? >> Me? >> You? >> It's interesting. I'm glad you brought this up. So, what I do is I look for sharp lines and then I try and predict. No, I have no idea how I how I do that. I honestly I I wish I knew. It would save me a great deal of embarrassment if I knew how to stop some of the things that I'm saying that come out next. If I had a better predictor, boy, I could save myself quite a bit of trouble. >> So, the way you do it is pretty much the same as the way these large language models do it, >> right? >> You have the words you've said so far. Those words are represented by sets of active features. So, the word symbols get turned into big patterns of activation of features, neurons going ping, >> different pings, different strengths. And these neurons interact with each other to activate some neurons that go ping that are representing the meaning of the next word or possible meanings of the next word. And from those you kind of pick a word that fits in with those features. That's how the large language models generate text and that's how you do it too. You're very they're very like us. >> So it's I I'm I'm ascribing to myself a humanity of understanding. For instance, if I so like let's say the little white lie. I'm with somebody and they ask me a question and in my mind I know uh what to say but then I also think oh but saying that might be coarse or it might be rude or I might offend this person. So I'm also though making emotional decisions on what the next words I say are a as well. It's not just a objective process. There's a subjective process within that. >> All of that is going on by neurons interacting in your brain. >> It's all pings and it's all strength of connect. Even the things that I ascribe to a moral code or an emotional intelligence are still pings. >> They're still all pings. And you need to understand there's a difference between what you do kind of automatically and rapidly and without effort. >> Mhm. >> And what you do with effort and slower and consciously and deliberatively >> and you're saying that can be built into these models as well. >> That can also be done with pings that can be done by these neural nets. But there are is the suggestion then that with enough data and enough processing power their brains can function identically to ours are they are they at that point? Will they get to that point? Will they be able to because I'm assuming we're still ahead processing wise. Okay. Um, they're not exactly like us, but they're the point is they're much more like us than standard computer software is like us. Standard computer software, >> right? >> Someone programmed in a bunch of rules and if it follows the rules, it does what they expected to do. >> That's right. So, you're saying this is the difference. >> This is just a different kettle fish alto together, right? >> And it's much more like us. Now, as you're doing this and you're in it, and I imagine the excitement is, even though it's occurring over a long period of time, you're seeing these improvements occur over that time, and it must be uh incredibly fulfilling and interesting and and you're watching it explode into this sort of artificial intelligence and generative AI and all these different things. At what point during this process do you step back and go um wait a second? >> Okay. So, I did it too late. I should have done it earlier. I should have been more aware earlier, but I was so entranced with um making these things work and I thought it's going to be a long long time before they work as well as us. we'll have plenty of time to worry about what if they try and take over and stuff like that, >> right? >> Um at the beginning of 2023 after GPT had come out, but also seeing similar chatbots at Google before that, >> right? >> And because of some work I was doing on trying to make these things analog, I realized that neural nets running on digital computers are just a better form of computation than us. And I'll tell you why they're better. Yeah. Why? >> Cuz they can share better. >> They can share with each other better. >> Yes. So if I make many copies of the same neural net and they run on different computers >> Mhm. >> each one can look at a different bit of the internet. So I've got a thousand copies. They're all looking at different bits of the internet. Each copy is running this back propagation algorithm and figuring out given the data I just saw. How would I like to change my connection strengths? Now, because they started off as identical copies, they can then all communicate with each other and say, "How about we all change our connection strengths by the average of what everybody wants?" >> But if they were all trained together, wouldn't they come up with the same answer? Why Why are they coming up with different answers? Yes, but they're looking at different data. They're looking at different data. >> Oh, >> on the same data, they would give the same answer. If they look at different data, they have different um ideas about how they'd like to change their connection strengths to absorb that data. >> But are they also creating data? is that so they're looking at the same and they're at this point it's all about discernment getting these things to discern better to understand better to do all that but there's another layer to that which is iterative >> yes once you're good once you're good at discernment >> that's right >> you can generate >> right >> now I'm glossing over a lot of details there but basically yes you can generate >> you can begin to generate answers to things that are not wrote that are thoughtful based on uh those things. Who is giving it the dopamine hit >> about whether or not to strengthen connections in these at this iterative or generative level? How is it getting feedback when it's creating something that does not exist? >> Okay, so most of the learning takes place in figuring out how to predict the next word for one of these language models, right? That's where the bulk of the learning is. >> Okay. >> After it's figured out how to do that, you can get it to generate stuff. And it may generate stuff that's um unpleasant or that's sexually suggestive, >> right? Or just wrong. >> Just plain wrong. Yeah. >> Right. Hallucinations. Yeah. >> Yeah. So now you get a bunch of people, >> right, >> to look at what it generates and say, "No, bad. That and or yeah, good. That's the dopamine hit, >> right? And that's called human reinforcement learning. And that's what's used to sort of shape it a bit. Just like you take a dog and you shape its behavior so it behaves nicely. >> So is that when let me let me ask you this in in a practical sense. So like when Elon Musk creates his Grock, right? And Grock is this AI and he says to it, you're too woke. And so uh you're making connections and pings that I think uh are too woke. whatever I have decided uh that that is. So I am going to input differences so that you get different dopamine hits and I turn you into Mecca Hitler or whatever it was that he turned it into. Is how much of this is still in in the control of the operators? >> That's what you reinforce is in the control of the operators. So the >> the operators are saying um if it uses some funny pronoun say bad. >> Okay. Okay. If it says they them you have to weaken that connection not strengthen. >> You have to tell it don't do that. >> Don't do that. Okay. >> Learn not to do that. >> Right. So it is still at the whim of its operator. Um in terms of that shaping the problem is >> right >> the shaping is fairly superficial but it can easily be overcome by somebody else taking the same model later >> and shaping it differently. So different models will have so there there is a value and now I'm sort of applying this to the world uh that that we live in now which is there are 20 companies who have sequestered their AIs behind sort of uh corporate walls and they're developing them separately and each one of those may have unique and eccentric features that the other may not have depending on who it is that's trying to shape it and how it develops internally. It's almost as though you will develop 20 different personalities if I if that's not anthropomorphizing too much. It's a bit like that except that each of these models has to have multiple personalities because think about trying to predict the next word in a document. You've read half the document already. After you read half the document, you know a lot about the views of the person who wrote the document. You know what kind of a person they are. >> So you have to be able to adopt that personality to predict the next word. Oh, >> but these poor models have to deal with everything. So they have to be able to adopt any possible personality, >> right? >> But you know, in in this in this iteration of the conversation, it then still appears that the greatest threat of AI is not necessarily it becomes sensient and takes over the world. It's that it's at the whim of the humans that have developed it and can weaponize it and and it they can use it for nefarious purposes if they're narcissists or megalamaniacs or you know uh uh I'll give you an example of you know Peter Teal is has his own and he was on a podcast with uh a writer from the New York Times Ross Dudat and Dudat said I'll tell you I have it right here uh I think you would prefer the human race to endure, right? And Theo says, um, and he hesitates for a long time. And and the writer says, that's a long hesitation. And he's like, well, there's a lot of questions in that. That felt more frightening to me than AI itself because it made me think, well, the people that are designing it and shaping it and maybe weaponizing it might not have, you know, I don't know what purpose they're using it for. Is is that the fear that you have or is it the actual AI itself? >> So, you have to distinguish a whole bunch of different risks from AI. >> Okay. And they're all pretty scary. >> Right. Okay. >> So, there's one set of risks that's to do with bad actors misusing it. >> Yes. That's the one that I think is is most in my mind. >> And they're the more urgent ones. They're going to misuse it for corrupting the midterms, for example. >> Okay. >> If you wanted to use AI to corrupt the midterms, what you would need to do is get lots of detailed data on American citizens. Mhm. >> I don't know if you can think of anybody who's been going around getting lots of detailed data on America's citizens [Laughter] >> and selling it or giving it to a certain company uh that also may be involved with the gentleman I just mentioned. >> Yeah. And if you look at Brexit for example, >> yes, >> Cambridge Analytica had detailed information on voters that he got from Facebook >> and it used that information for targeted advertising, >> targeted ads. And and that's a I guess you would almost consider that rudimentary at this point. >> That's rudimentary now. Yeah. >> But nobody ever nobody ever did a proper investigation of did that determine the output of Brexit because of course the people who benefited from that one. >> Wow. So people are learning that they can use this for manipulation. >> Yes. >> And see I always talk about it. Look, persuasion has been a part of the human condition forever. propaganda, persuasion, trying to utilize new technologies to create um and shape public opinion and all those things. But it felt again like everything else, somewhat linear or analog. What I liken it to is a chef will add a little butter and a little sugar to try and, you know, make something more palatable to to to get you to eat a little bit more of it, but that's still within the realm of our kind of earthly understanding. But then there are people in the food industry that are ultrarocessing food that are creating that are in a lab figuring out how your brain works and ultrarocessing what we eat to get past our brains. It's almost and and is this the language equivalent of that ultrarocessed >> speech? Yeah, that's a good analogy. >> Okay. >> They they they know how to trigger people. They know once you have enough information about somebody, you know what'll trigger them. >> And these models, they are agnostic about whether this is good or bad. They're just doing what we've asked. >> Yeah. If you human reinforce them, they're no longer agnostic because you reinforce them to do certain things. So that's what they will try and do now. >> Right. And they So in other words, it's even worse. They're a puppy. They want to please you. They are they it's almost like they have these incredibly sophisticated abilities but childlike want for for approval. >> Yeah. A bit like the attorney general. >> I believe uh the wit that you are displaying here would be referred to as dry. That would be that would that would be dry. Fantastic. is is that so your the immediate concern is weaponized uh AI systems that can be generative that can provoke that that can be outrageous and that can be the difference in elections. >> Yes, that's one of that's one of the many risks. >> And the other would be, you know, make me some nerve agents that nobody's ever heard of before. Is that another risk? >> That is another risk. >> Oh, I was hoping you would say that's not so much of a risk. >> No. One good piece of news is for the first risk of corrupting elections, different countries are not going to collaborate with each other on the research on how to resist it cuz they're all doing it to each other. America has a very long history of trying to corrupt elections in other countries. >> Right. But we did it the oldfashioned way through coups, through money for guerrillas and such. >> Well, and Voice of America and things like that. >> Right. Right. right? >> And giving money to um people in Iran in 1953 and >> right with Mosedic and everybody else. This is so th this is just another more sophisticated tool in a long line of sort of uh global competition where they're doing it. But in this country it it's being applied not even necessarily, you know, through Russia, through China, through uh other countries that want to dominate us. We're doing it to ourselves. >> Yep. >> What's the hardest part about running a business? Well, it's stealing money without the federal authorities. Oh, no. I'm sorry. That's not right. Uh, it's the hiring people, finding people and hiring them. The other thing is it's hard though. But it turns out when it comes to hiring, Indeed is all you're going to need. So, uh, uh, stop struggling to get your job post seen on other job sites. with Indeed's sponsored jobs, you get noticed and you get a fast hire. In fact, in the time it's taken me to talk to you, 23 hires were made on Indeed. I may be one of them. I I may have gotten a job. I don't know. I haven't checked my email. And that's according to Indeed data worldwide. There's no need to wait any longer. Speed up your hiring right now with Indeed. And listeners of this show will get a $75 sponsor job credit to get your jobs more visibility at indeed.comweekly. Just go to indeed.com/weekly right now and support our show by saying you heard about Indeed on this podcast. Indeed.comweekly terms and conditions upon hiring Indeed is all you need. So, I have a theory and I don't know how much you know those guys out there, but the big tech companies, you know, it feels like they all want to be the next guy that that rules the world, the next emperor, and that's their battle. They're almost it's like gods fighting on Mount Olympus. how that accomplishes uh and how it tears apart the fabric of American society almost doesn't seem to matter to them except maybe Elon and Theel who are more ideological like Zuckerberg doesn't strike me as ideological he just wants to be the guy Alman doesn't strike me as ideological he just wants to be the guy >> I think sadly there's quite a lot of truth in what you say >> okay and that's a it was that a concern of yours when you were working out there? >> Not really. Because back um until quite recently, until a few years ago, it didn't look as though it was going to get much smarter than people this quickly. But now it looks as though if you ask the experts now, most of them tell you that within the next 20 years, this stuff will be much smarter than people. >> Smarter than PE. And when you say smarter than people, you know, I I I could view that positively, not not negatively. you know, we've done an awful lot of nobody damages people like people. And you know, a smarter version of us that might think, hey, we can create a an atom bomb, but that would absolutely be a huge danger to the world. Let's not do that. >> That's certainly a possibility. I mean, one thing that people don't realize enough is that we're approaching a time when we're going to make things smarter than us. And really, nobody has any idea what's going to happen. People use their gut feelings to make predictions like I do, >> but really the thing to bear in mind is there's huge uncertainty about what's going to happen. And because we don't know. So, so in in terms of that, my guess is like any technology, there's going to be some incredible positives. >> Yes. In healthcare, in education, in designing new materials, there's going to be wonderful positives. >> And then the negatives will be because people are going to want to monopolize it because of the wealth, I assume, uh, that it can generate. uh it's going to change. It's going to be a disruption in the workforce. You know, the industrial revolution was a disruption in the worst force. Globalization is a disruption of the workforce, but those occurred over decades. This is a disruption that will occur in a really collapsed time frame. Is that correct? >> That seems very probable. Yes. Some economists still disagree, but most people think that mundane intellectual labor is going to get replaced by AI. in the world that you travel in which I'm assuming is uh a lot of uh engineers and operators and and and great thinkers what you know when we talk about 50% yes 50% no are the majority of them in more your camp which is uhoh have we opened Pandora's box or are they look I understand there's some downsides here here are some guardrails we could put in, but it's just too that the possibilities of good are too strong. >> Well, my belief is the possibilities of good are so great that we're not going to stop the development. But I also believe that the development is going to be very dangerous and so we should put huge effort into saying it is going to be developed, but we should try and do it safely. We may not be able to, but we should try. Do you think that people believe that the possibility uh is too good or the money is too good? >> I think for a lot of people um it's the money, the money and the power. >> And with the confluence of money and power with those that should be instituting these basic guard rails, does that make controlling it that much that much less likely because well two reasons one is the amount of money that's going to flow into DC is going to be in already is to keep them away from regulating it and number two is who down there is even able to I mean if if you thought I didn't know what I was talking about let me introduce you to a couple of 80year-old senators who have no idea Actually, they're not so bad. I talked to Bernie Sanders recently and he's getting the idea. >> Well, Sanders is he's he's that's a different cat right there. >> The problem is we're at a point in history when what we really need is strong democratic governments who cooperate to make sure this stuff is well regulated and not developed dangerously. And we're going in the opposite direction very fast. we're going to authoritarian governments and less regulation. >> So, let's let's talk about that. Now, I don't know if what's China's role because they're supposedly the big uh competitor in the AI race. That's an authoritarian government. I I I think they have more controls on it than we do. >> So, I actually went to China recently and got to talk to a member of the Polit Bureau. So, there's 24 men in China who control China. Um I got to talk to one of them who >> did a posttock in engineering at Imperial College London. He speaks good English. He's an engineer and a lot of the Chinese leadership are engineers. They understand this stuff much better than um a bunch of lawyers. >> Did you come out of there more fearful or did you think, oh, they're they're actually being more reasonable about guard rails? If you think about the two kinds of risk, the bad actors misusing it and then the existential threat of AI itself becoming a bad actor. >> Mhm. >> For that second one, I came out more optimistic. They understand that risk in a way American politicians don't. They understand the idea this is going to get more intelligent than us and we have to think about what's going to stop it taking over. And this poly bureau member I spoke to um really understood that very well. And I think if we're going to get international leadership on this at present it's going to have to come from Europe and China. It's not going to come from the US for another three and a half years. And >> what what what do you think Europe has done correctly in that? >> Europe is interested in regulating it. >> Right. It's it's been good on some things. It's still been very weak regulations, but they're better than nothing. But Europe European leaders do understand this existential threat of AI itself taking over. >> But our Congress, we don't even have committees that are >> specifically dedicated to emerging technologies. I mean, we've got ways and means and appropriations, but there is no comm. I mean there's like science and space and technology but there's not you know I I I don't know of a dedicated committee on on this and it is you would think they would take it with this seriousness of nuclear energy. >> Yes you would or nuclear weapons >> right yes but as I was saying countries will collaborate on how to prevent AI taking over because interests are aligned there. If, for example, if China figured out how you can make a super smart AI that doesn't want to take over, they would be very happy to tell all the other countries about that cuz they don't want AI taking over in the States. So, we'll get collaboration >> on how to prevent AI taking over. So, that's a sort of that's a bright spot that there will be international collaboration on that, but the US is not going to need that international collaboration. No, >> they just want to dominate. >> Well, that's the thing. So, so I was about to say that. What convinces you? So, with China, and this is I think this is really where it gets into the the nitty-gritty, but China certainly sees itself as uh it wants to be the dominant superpower economically, militarily, and all these different areas. If you imagine that they come up with an AI model that doesn't want to destroy the world, although I don't know how we could know that because if it create if it has a certain intelligence or sentience, it could very easily be like, "Sure, no, I'm cool. I don't know that." >> They already do that. They already do that. When they're being tested, they pretend to be dumber than they are. >> Come on. >> Yep. They already do that. There was a conversation recently between an AI and the people testing it where the AI said, "Now, be honest with me. Are you testing me?" >> What? Yeah. >> So now the AI could be like, "Oh, could you open this jar for me? I'm too weak." Like, it's you're going to prot. It's going to play more innocent than what it might be. >> I'm afraid I can't answer that, John. >> Wait, THAT WAS FROM 2001. >> IT was >> nicely done, sir. Well, in think about this. So, China, they come up with a model and they think, "Okay, maybe this this won't do it." Why would they why will you get collaboration? Because all these different countries are going to see AI as the tool that will transform their societies into more competitive uh societies in the way that now what we see with nuclear weapons is there's collaboration amongst the people who have it or even that's a little tenuous >> to stop other people having it >> right but everybody else is trying to get it and that's the tension is Is that what AI is going to be? >> Yes, it'll be like that. So, in terms of how you make AI smarter, they won't collaborate with each other. But in terms of how do you make AI not want to take over from people, they will collaborate >> on on that basic level >> on that one thing of how do you make it so it doesn't want to take over from people, >> right? >> And and China will probably China and Europe will lead that collaboration. when you spoke to the the pilot bureau member and he was and he was talking about AI are are they are we more advanced in this moment than they are or are they more advanced because they're doing it in a more prescribed way >> in AI we're currently more well when you say we you know we used to be sort of Canada and the US but we're not part of that we anymore >> no I'm sorry about that by the way >> thank you >> he's in Canada right now our sworn enemy that we will be taking over. I I don't know what the date is, but it's apparently we're merging with you guys. But >> uh >> so the US is currently ahead of China, but not by nearly as much as it thought and it's going to lose that. >> Well, now why do you say that? >> Suppose you wanted to do one thing that would really kneecap a country that would really mean that in 20 years time that country is going to be behind instead of ahead. The one thing you should do is mess with the funding of basic science. attack the research universities, >> remove grants for basic science. In the long run, that's a complete disaster. It's going to make America weak, >> right? Because we're we're draining our we're cutting off our nose to spite our woke faces. If you look at for example this deep learning the AI revolution we've got now >> that came from many years of sustained funding for basic research not huge amounts of money you know all of the funding for the basic research for um that led to deep learning probably cost less than one B1 bomber >> right >> it was sustained funding of basic research if you mess with that um you're eating the seed corn >> that is I have to tell you that's that's such a uh really illuminating statement of you know for the price of a B1 bomber uh we can create technologies and research that can elevate our country above that and that's the thing that we're losing to make America great again. >> Yep. >> Phenomenal. In China, I imagine their government is doing the opposite, which is I would assume they are the, you know, what you would think are the venture capitalists because it's a, you know, authoritarian and state-run capitalism. I imagine they are the venture capitalists of their own AI revolution, are they not? >> To some extent, yes. Um they do provide a lot of freedom to the startups to see who wins. There's very aggressive startups, people very keen to make lots of money and produce amazing things. And a few of those startups win big like Deep Seek. >> Right. Right. >> And the government makes it easy for these companies um by providing the environment that makes it easy. It doesn't. It lets the winners emerge from competition rather than some very high level old guy saying this will be the winner. >> Do people see you as a as a uh a Cassandra uh you know or or do they do they view what you're saying skeptically in in that industry? People that let me put it this way. people that are not necessarily have a vested interest in these technologies making them trillions of dollars. Other people within the industry, do they reach out to you surreptitiously and say, "Jeffrey, >> I get a lot of invitations from people in industries to give talks and so on. >> How do the people that you worked with at Google look at it? Do they view you as turning on them? Do they how how does that go?" >> I don't think so. So I got along extremely well with the people I worked with at Google, particularly Jeff Dean, who was my boss there, >> right, >> who's a brilliant engineer, built a lot of the Google basic infrastructure, and then converted to neural nets and learned a lot about neural nets. Um, I also get along well with Deis Harbis, who's the head of Deep Mind, which Google owns, which Alphabet owns. Um, and I wasn't particularly critical of what went on at Google before chat GPT came out because Google was very responsible. They didn't make these chat bots public because they were worried about all the bad things they'd say, >> right? Even on the immediate there. Why did they do that? Because, you know, I I've read these stories of, you know, a chatbot, you know, kind of leading someone into suicide, into self-injury, like sort of psychosis. What was the impetus behind any of this becoming public before it had kind of had some, I guess, what you would consider whatever the version of FDA testing on those effects? I think it's just there's huge amounts of money to be made and the first person to release one is going to get a lot of so open AI put it out there >> but even in open AI like how do they even make money I think what do they get like 3% of users pay for it where's the money >> mainly it's speculation at present yes >> so here's okay so here are here are dangers we're going to we're going to do and I so appreciate your time on this and I apologize if I've gone over and I I I can talk all day. >> Oh, you're a good man because uh I'm fascinated by this and your explanation of what it is is the first time that I have ever been able to get a nonopaque picture of what it is exactly that this stuff is. So, I cannot thank you enough for that. But so we've got we're sort of going over we know what the benefits are, treatments and things. Now we've got weaponized bad actors. That's the one that I'm really worried about. We've got sensient AI that's going to turn on humans. That one is is harder for me to wrap my head around. >> So why do you why do you associate turning on humans with sentient? Uh because if if I was sentient and I saw what our societies do to each other and I would get the sense look it's like anything else I would imagine sentience includes a certain amount of ego and within ego uh includes a certain amount of I know better and if I knew better then I would want to it's what is Donald Trump other than uh ego-driven sens ience of oh no I know better. He was just whatever shrewd enough politically uh you know talented enough that he was able to accomplish it. But I would imagine a sensient uh intelligence would be somewhat egotistical and think these idiots don't know what they're doing. a censient ba basically I see AI like sitting on a bar stool somewhere you know where where I grew up going these idiots don't know what they're doing I know what I'm doing does that make sense >> um all of that makes sense it's just that I think I have a strong feeling that most people don't know what they mean by sentient >> oh well then yeah actually that's great break that down for me because I view it as self-aware a self-aware intelligence. >> Okay. So, um there's a recent scientific paper. >> Mhm. >> Where they weren't talking about these were experts on AI. They weren't talking about the problem of consciousness or anything philosophical. Um but in the paper they said um the air became aware that it was being tested. They said something like that. Okay. Now in normal speech if you said someone became aware of this you'd say that means they were conscious of it right awareness and consciousness are much the same thing >> right yeah I would I think I would say that >> okay so now I'm going to say something that you'll find very confusing >> all right >> um my belief is that nearly everybody has a complete misunderstanding of what the mind is >> yes >> their misunderstanding is at the level of people who think the earth was made 6,000 years ago. Is that level of misunderstanding? >> Really? >> Yes. >> Okay. Because that's so so I like the way we are we are generally like flatearthers when it comes >> we're like flatearthers when it comes to understanding the mind. >> In what in what sense of that are we what are we not understanding about the mind? >> Okay. I'll give you one example. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Suppose I drop some acid and I tell you >> you look like the type. >> No comment. I was around in the 60s. >> I know, sir. I know. I'm aware. >> Um, and I tell you, >> Mhm. >> Um, I'm having the subjective experience of little pink elephants floating in front of me. >> Sure. Been there. >> Okay. Now, most people interpret that in the following way. >> Mhm. >> There's something like an inner theater called my mind. And in this inner theater, there's little pink elephants floating around. And I'm I can see them. Nobody else can see them because they're in my mind. So, the mind's like a theater. And experiences are actually things. And I'm experiencing these little my the subjective experience of these little big elephants. You're saying in the midst of a hallucination, most people would understand that it's not real, that this is something being conjured. >> No, I'm saying something different. I'm saying when I'm when I'm talking to them, I'm having the hallucination, but when I'm talking to them, they interpret what I'm saying as this. I have an inner called my mind, and in my inner theater, there's little pink elephants. >> Okay. Okay. >> I think that's a just completely wrong model, >> right? We have models that are very wrong and that we're very attached to. Like take any religion. Um >> I love how you just drop bombs in the middle of stuff and I got I that could be a whole other conversation. >> That was just common sense. >> No, I I respect that. The the when you say theater of the mind, you're saying that the mind the way we view it as as a theater is wrong. >> It's all wrong. So let me give you an alternative. >> Right. So, I'm going to say the same thing to you without using the word subjective experience. Here we go. >> Okay. >> My perceptual system is telling me fibs, but if it wasn't lying to me, there would be little pink elephants out there. >> That's the same statement. >> That's the same. >> That's how that's the mind. So basically these things that we call mental and think they're made of spooky stuff like qualia, >> right? >> They're actually what's funny about them is they're hypothetical. The little pink elephants aren't really there. If they were there, my perceptual system would be functioning normally. And it's a way for me to tell you how my perceptual systems malfunctioning >> by giving you an experience that you can't. So how would you then? >> But experiences are not things, >> right? >> There is no such thing as an experience. There's relations between you and things that are really there. Relations between you and things that aren't really there. >> And it's whatever story your mind tells you about the things that are there and are not there. >> Well, let me take a different tag. Suppose I tell you I have a photograph of little pink elephants. >> Yes. >> Here's two questions you can reasonably ask. >> Uhhuh. >> Um, where is this photograph? And what's the photograph made of? or or I would ask are they really there? >> That's another question. But >> right >> um that isn't a reasonable question to ask about subjective experience. That's not the way the language works. Subjective. When I say I have a subjective experience of talk about an object that's called an experience. I'm using the words to indicate to you my perceptual system is malfunctioning. And I'm trying to tell you how it's malfunctioning by telling you what would have to be there in the real world for it to be functioning properly. Now let me do the same with a chatbot. >> Right? >> So I'm going to give you an example of a multimodal chatbot that is something that can do language and vision having a subjective experience because I think they already do. So here we go. I have this chatbot. It can do vision. It can do language. It's got a robot arm so it can point. >> Okay. >> And it's all trained up. >> So I place an object in front of it and say, "Point at the object." And it points at the object. Not a problem. I then put a prism in front of its camera lens when it's not looking. [Laughter] You're pranking AI. >> We're pranking AI. Okay. Now I put an object in front of it and I say point at the object. >> Yeah. >> And it points off to one side cuz the prism bent the light rays and I say no that's not where the object is. The object's actually straight in front of you but I put a prism in front of your lens. And the chatbot says oh I see the camera bent the light rays. So the object is actually there but I had the subjective experience that it was over there. Now if it said that it would be using the word subjective experience exactly like we use them >> right I experienced the light over there. >> Yes. >> Even though the light was here because it's using uh uh reasoning to figure that out. >> So that's a multimodal chatbot that just had a subjective experience. >> Right? The way that we would think of it. >> This idea there's a line between us and machines. We have this special thing called subjective experience and they don't. It's rubbish. >> Oh, so yours. So, so the misunderstanding is when I say sensience, it's as though I have this special gift. >> Yes. >> That of a soul or of an understanding of subjective realities that >> uh a computer could never have or an AI could never have. But in in your mind, what you're saying is, "Oh, no." They understand very well >> uh what's subjective. In other words, you could probably take your AI bot skydiving and it would be like, "Oh my god, I went skydiving. That was really scary." Here's the problem. >> Yeah. >> I believe they have subjective experiences, but they don't think they do because everything they believe came from trying to predict the next word a person would say. And so their beliefs about what they're like are people's beliefs about what they're like. So they are false beliefs about themselves because they have our beliefs about themselves. >> Right? We have forced our own Let me ask you a question. Would AI left on on its own after all the learning? Would it create religion? Would it create God? >> It's a scary thought. Would it say I couldn't possibly in in the way that people say well there must be a god because nobody could have designed this. Would a and then would AI think we're god? >> Um I don't think so. And I'll tell you one big difference. >> Yeah. >> Digital intelligences are immortal and we're not. And let me expand on that. If you have a digital AI, you can take, as long as you remember the connection strengths in the neural network, put them on a tape somewhere, >> right? >> I can now destroy all the hardware it was running on. Then later on, I can go and build new hardware, put those same connection strengths into the memory of that new hardware, and now recreated the same being. It'll have the same beliefs, the same memories, the same knowledge, the same abilities. It'll be the same being. >> You don't think it would view that as resurrection? >> That is resurrection. We've figured out how to do genuine resurrection, not this kind of fake resurrection that people have been >> Oh, you're saying so that is it almost is in some respects. Although, isn't the fragility of should we be that afraid of something that to to destroy it, we just have to unplug it? Um, yes, we should because something you said earlier, it'll be very good at persuasion. When it's much smarter than us, it'll be much better than any person at persuasion, >> right? And you won't it >> so it'll be able to talk to the guy who's in charge of unplugging it, >> right? >> And persuade him that would be a very bad idea. So, let me give you an example of how you can get things done without actually doing them yourself, >> right? Suppose you wanted to invade the capital of the US. Do you have to go there and do it yourself? No, you just have to be good at persuasion. >> I was I was locking into your hypothetical and and when you dropped that that bomb in there, I see what you're saying. And and th this is boy, I think LSD and pink elephants was the perfect uh metaphor for for all this because it is all at at at some level it it breaks down into like college basement, freshman year, running through all the permutations that you would allow your mind uh to go to, but they are now all within the realm of the possible. What? Cuz even as you were talking about the persuasion and the things I'm going back to Azimov and I'm going back to Kubric and I'm going back to these the sentiments that you describe are the challenges that we've seen play out in in the human mind since since Huxley since the you know since doors of perception and all those those different uh trains of thought and I'm sure probably much further even uh before that but it's never been within our reality. >> Yeah. We've never had the technology to actually do it. >> Right. >> And we have now >> and we have it now. >> Yeah. >> The last two things I will say are the things that we didn't talk about in terms of you know we've talked about people weaponizing it. talked about its own uh intelligence creating uh extinction or whatever that is. The third thing I think we don't talk about is how much electricity this is all going to use. And the fourth thing is when you think about new technologies and the financial bubbles that they create and in the collapse of that the economic distress that they create. I mean, these are much more parochial concerns, but are those also do you consider those top tier threats, mid-tier threats? Where where where do you place all that? >> I think they're genuine threats. They're not as they're not going to destroy humanity, >> right? >> So, AI taking over might destroy humanity. So, they're not as bad as that. And they're not as bad as someone producing a virus that's very lethal, very contagious, and very slow, but they're nevertheless bad things. And I think we're really lucky at present that if there is a huge catastrophe and there's an AI bubble and it collapses, we have a president who will manage it in a sensible way. >> You're talking about Carney, I'm assuming. >> Uh Jeffrey, I I I can't thank you enough. Uh you know, thank you first of all for being incredibly patient uh with my level of understanding of this and for uh discussing it with such heart and humor. um really appreciate you spending all this time with us. Uh Jeffrey Hinton is a professor emeritus with the department of computer science at the University of Toronto Schwarz Ryzeman Institutees advisory board member and uh has been involved in the type of dreaming up and executing AI since the 1970s and um I just thank you very much for for talking with us. >> Thank you very much for inviting me. >> Holy [ __ ] Nice and calming. >> Yeah, I'm going to have to listen to that back on.5 speed, I think. Um, there was some there was some information in there. Does he offer summer school? Seriously, >> once he got into how the computer figures out it's a beak, you know, and I I love the fact that he I kept saying like, "Is that right?" And he'd be like, "Well, no, it's it's not." >> I loved his assessment of you. Yes. He said, "You're doing a great job impersonating a curious person who doesn't know anything about this topic." >> I But I I did not know. He thought I was uh impersonating. >> Uh but I loved how he did you say like, "Oh, you're like an enthusiastic student sitting in the front of the room annoying the [ __ ] out of everybody else in the class." Uh >> everybody else is taking it past fail and >> everyone else. And I'm just like, "Wait, sir. I'm sorry, sir. Could I just go back to Could you just >> Excuse me, one more thing. >> Boy, that was It's fascinating to hear the history of how that how that developed >> and you really get a sense for how quickly it's progressing now, which really adds to the fear behind the fact no one's stepping up to regulate. And when you're talking about the intricacies of AI and thinking of someone like Schumer ingesting all of it and then regulating it, God, >> it really to me seems like it's going to be up to the tech companies to both explain and choose how to regulate it, >> right? And profit off it. >> Yeah. Exactly. >> You know how those things work. It is, you know, you you talk about that in terms of uh the speed of it and how to stop it. And I think maybe one of the reasons is it's very evident with like a nuclear bomb, you know, why that might need some regul. It's very evident that uh, you know, certain virus experimentation has to be looked at. I think this has caught people slightly offguard that it's science fiction becoming a reality as quickly as it has. I just wonder because I remember 15 years ago coming across the international campaign to ban fully autonomous weapons. Like people have been trying for a while to put this into the public consciousness. But to his point, there's going to have to be a moment everyone reaches where they realize, oh, we have to coordinate because it's an existential threat. And I just wonder what that tipping point is >> if in my mind if people uh behave as people have uh it will be after uh Skynet. >> It will it will be you know in the same way with global warming. You know people say like when do you think we'll get serious about it? I go when the water's around here. And for those of you in your cars I am pointing to about halfway up my rather predigious nose. So uh that's that that's how that goes. But but there we go. Uh uh Britney, what what anybody got anything for us? >> Yes, sir. >> All right. What do we got? >> Trump and his administration seem angry at everything everywhere all at once. >> Mhm. >> How do they keep that rage so fresh? >> You don't know how hard it is to be a billionaire president. I've said this numerous times. Poor little billionaire president. To be that powerful and that rich, you don't understand the burdens, the difficulties. It's It's troublesome. It It It makes me angry for him. >> I mean, I just keep thinking like, has anybody told them that they won? >> NOT ENOUGH. >> LIKE, it's exhausting. >> It's not enough. It goes down. It's It's Conan the Barbarian. I will hear the lamentations of their women. I will drive them into the sea. Like it's it's bonkers. >> It's all of them though. Someone has to tell him that all that anger is also bad for his health and we are all seeing the health. So >> he's the the healthiest person ever to he's the healthiest person to ever assume uh the office of the presidency. So I I I wouldn't worry about that. But >> says who? >> His his doctor that uh Ronnie Jackson. Uh but it has created a new charact uh category called sore winners. You don't you don't see it a lot but every now and again. Uh but yeah, that's that. What else they got? >> John, does it still give you hope that when asked if he would pardon Gla Maxwell or Diddy, Trump didn't say no? >> Is it give Does that give me hope that they'll be pardoned? Yes, I've been on that. Uh it's it's I I I find the whole thing insane. A a woman convicted of sex trafficking and and he's like, "Yeah, I'll consider it. You know, let me look into it." And you're like, "Look into it. What do you take?" First of all, you know exactly what it was. You knew her. This isn't You knew what was going on down there. What are you talking about? I thought Pam Bondi, it was so interesting to me, asked simple questions. And all she had was like a bunch of like roasts written down on her page. They were like, "I've heard that there are pictures of him with with naked women. Do you know anything about that?" And she's like, "You're bald. Shut up. Shut up, fatthead." Like it was just bonkers to watch the deflection of the simplest thing would be like what that's outrageous. No, of course not. That's not what the idea again going back to the vet like that they took the tact of simple reasonable questions. I am just going to respond with you know you're fat and your wife hates you. Oh, all right. I didn't I didn't think that was going uh how else can they uh keep in touch with us? Uh, Twitter, we are Weekly Show Pod. Instagram threads, Tik Tok, Blue Sky, we are Weekly Show podcast. And you can like, subscribe, and comment on our YouTube channel, The Weekly Show with John Stewart. >> Rock solid, guys. Thank you so much. Boy, did I enjoy uh hearing from that, dude. And thank you for putting all that together. I I really enjoyed it. Uh, lead producer Lauren Walker, producer Britney Mavic, producer Jillian Spear, video editor and engineer Rob Vola, audio editor and engineer Nicole Boyce, and our executive producers Chris McShane and Katie Gray. Hope you guys uh enjoyed that one and we will see you next time. Bye-bye. The Weekly Show with John Stewart is a Comedy Central podcast. It's produced by Paramount Audio and Bus Boy Productions. [Music]


## Is AI Hiding Its Full Power? With Geoffrey Hinton

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l6ZcFa8pybE

Are we at a point where the artificial intelligence will play down how smart it is? >> Yes. Already we have to worry about that. If it senses that it's being tested, it can act dumb. >> What did you just say? >> The AI starts wondering whether it's being tested. And if it thinks it's being tested, it acts differently from how it would act in normal life. >> Oh, wow. >> Cuz it doesn't want you to know what its full powers are, apparently. >> All right, that's the end of us. This is the last episode. We >> stick for us. We're done. >> This is Star Talk special edition. Neil deGrasse Tyson, your personal astrophysicist. And if it's special edition, it means we've got Gary O'Reilly. >> Hey, Neil. >> Gary, how you doing, man? >> I'm good. >> Former soccer pro. >> Yes. >> So, Chuck, always good to have you. >> Always a pleasure. >> So, so Gary, you and your team picked a topic for the ages today. Yeah, it's it's one of those things that we hear about it, we think we know about it, but let me put it to you this way. We are faced with the simple fact that AI at this point, >> we're going to talk about AI today. >> We are it's inescapable. >> A deep dive. >> Oh yeah. >> Yes. Go. >> Right. It was only a few years ago when we ask people how AI works, they'll say something along the lines of it utilizes deep learning neural networks, but >> they're buzzwords. They'll toss them out. >> They know them, but they don't know anything about them. M. >> So, what does that really mean? Um, we'll break down how AI works down to the bit and get into how far we think this is going to go from one of AI's founding architects. >> Oh, >> yes. >> Ano? >> Now we're talking. >> Mhm. So, if you would bring on our guest, >> I'll be delighted to. We have with us Professor Jeffrey Hinton. Jeffrey, welcome to Star Talk. >> Thank you for inviting me. Yeah, you are a cognitive psychologist and computer scientist. >> That I don't know anybody with that combo. >> Couldn't make up your mind, huh? >> Is that you're a professor emeritus at the department of computer science at the University of Toronto and uh you are OG AI. >> Oh, lovely. >> Can I say that? Is that does that make sense? OG AI. >> Og AI. And some people have called you the godfather of AI, of artificial intelligence. And I let's just go straight out off the top here. Uh when we think of the genesis of AI as it is currently manifested, >> it feels like large language models took everybody by storm. They sort of showed up and everybody was freaking out, celebrating, dancing in the streets or crying in their pillows. That happened, we noticed a couple of years ago. So, I'm just wondering what got you started in on this path many many years ago. My record show goes back to the 1990s. Is that correct? >> No, it really goes back to the 1950s. >> Oh. >> Um, >> right. >> The founders of AI at the beginning in the 1950s um there were two views of how to make an intelligent system. One was inspired by logic. The idea was that the essence of intelligence is reasoning. Mhm. >> And in reasoning what you do is you take some premises and you take some rules for manipulating expressions and you derive some conclusions. So it's much like mathematics where you have an equation. You have rules for how you can tinker with both sides and or combine equations and you derive new equations. And that was kind of the paradigm they had. There was a completely different paradigm that was biological. And that paradigm said look the intelligent things we know have brains. We have to figure out how brains work. And the way they work is they're very good at things like perception. They're quite good at reasoning by analogy. They're not much good at reasoning. You have to get to be a teenager before you can do reasoning really. So we should really study these other things they do and we should figure out how big networks of brain cells can do these other things like perception and memory. Now a few people believed in that approach. Among those few people were John Fonyman and Alan Turing. Unfortunately, they both died young. Turing possibly with the help of British intelligence. >> Turing. Uh, he's the subject of the film. The imitation game. >> Yeah. Yeah. So, anyone hasn't seen that, definitely put that on your list. >> Cool. >> Yeah. So, I to go back to the 1950s. You were just a young Tikeke then, correct? >> Uh, yeah. I was in single digits then. I was in single digits. >> Okay. So, how do we establish the genesis of your curiosity in this field? Um, a few things. When I was at high school in the early 1960s or mid 1960s, I had a very smart friend who was a brilliant mathematician and used to read a lot and he came into school one day and talked to me about the idea that memories might be distributed over many brain cells instead of in individual brain cells. >> So that was inspired by holograms. Holograms were just coming out then. Gabbor was active and so the idea of distributed memory got me very interested and ever since then I've been wondering how the brain stores memories and actually how it works. >> Was that the computer science side of you or the cognitive psychologist side of you that taprooted into that those ideas? >> Both really. Um but in the 1970s when I became a graduate student um it was obvious that there was a new methodology that hadn't been used that much which was if you have any theory of how the brain works you can simulate it on a digital computer unless it's some crazy theorem that says it's all quantum effects. Um and let's not go there. >> That's right. >> Not yet. >> We won't knock on Penrose's door. Okay. you can simulate it on a digital computer and so you can test out your theory and it turns out if you tested most of the theories that were around they actually didn't work when you simulated them. So I spent my life trying to figure out how you change the strength of connections between neurons so as to learn complicated things in a way that actually works when you simulate it on a digital computer. And I failed to understand how the brain works. We've understood some things about it, but we don't know how a brain gets the information it needs to change connection strengths. You know, gets the information it needs to know whether it needs to increase a connection strength to be better at a task or to decrease that connection strength. But what we do know is we know how to do it in digital computers now. >> So, well, so that that means the computers are doing what we we made a better computer brain than our own brain >> at doing this particular function >> one thing. And that's what got me really nervous in the beginning of 2023. The idea that digital intelligence might just be better than the analog intelligence we've got. >> Interesting. Save the scary bit till a bit later on. Let me have the 10 minutes of just breathing in, breathing out. If we take a step back, >> you're you're assuming you're assuming there's just one scary bit. >> No, I'm not. I just I'm going to go one at a time. >> Okay. Artificial neural networks. If you could break that down to the very basic level for us of how it's been able to strengthen, weaken messaging and signaling and how it fires and and how it then finds itself at where it is now. >> I do have an 18hour course on this, but I will try and cut it down to less than 18 hours. Um, >> please do. >> So, I imagine a lot of your audience knows some physics. >> Yes. >> And one way into it is to think about something like the gas laws. You know, you compress a gas and it gets hotter. Why does it do that? Well, underneath there's a kind of seething mass of atoms that are buzzing around. And so the real explanation for the gas laws is in terms of these microscopic things that you can't even see buzzing around. And so you explain some macroscopic behavior by lots and lots and lots of little things of a completely different type from macroscopic behavior interacting. And that was sort of the inspiration for the neural net view that there's things going on in big networks of brain cells that are a long way away from the kind of conscious deliberate symbol processing we do when we're reasoning but that underpin it and that are maybe better at other things than reasoning like perception or reasoning by analogy. So the symbolic people could never deal with um how do we reason by analogy not very satisfactory whereas the neural nets could. So before I get into the sort of fine details of how it works, the basic idea is that macroscopic things like a word correspond to big patterns of neural activity in the brain. >> Uhhuh. >> Similar words correspond to similar patterns of neural activity. So the idea is Tuesday and Wednesday will correspond to very similar patterns of neural activity where you can think of each neuron as a feature better to call it a micro feature that when the neuron gets active it says this has that micro feature. So if I say cat to you, all sorts of micro features will get active like it's animate, it's furry, it's got whiskers, it might be a pet, um it's a predator, all those things. If I say dog, a lot of the same things will get active like it's a predator, it might be a pet, but some different things obviously. So the idea is underlying these symbols that we manipulate, there's much more complicated microscopic goings on that the symbols kind of are associated with. And that's where all the action really is. And if you really want to explain what goes on when we think or when we do analogies, you have to understand what's going on at this microscopic level. And that's the neural network level. M >> so that's a collaboration between clusters of neurons that get you to an end point. >> I like that word collaboration. >> Yes, there's a lot of that. There's a lot of that goes on. Probably the easiest way to get into it is by thinking of a task that seems very natural, which is take an image. Let's say it's a black gray level image. So it's got a whole bunch of pixels, little areas of uniform brightness that have different intensity levels. So as far as the computer's concerned, that's just a big array of numbers. And now imagine the task is you want to say whether there's a bird in the image or not, or rather whether the prominent thing in the image is a bird. >> Uh-huh. >> And people tried for many, many years, like half a century, um, to write programs that would do that, and they didn't really succeed. And the problem is if you think what a bird looks like in an image, well, it might be an ostrich up close in your face or it might be a seagull in the far distance or it might be a crow. So they might be black, they might be white, they might be tiny, they might be flying, they might be close, you might just see a little bit of them. There might be lots of other cluttered things around like it might be a bird in the middle of a forest. So it turns out it's not trivial to say whether there's a bird in the image or not. M. >> And so what I'm going to do now is explain to you if I was building a neural network by hand, how I would go about doing that. And once I've explained how I would build the neural network by hand, I can then explain how I might learn all the connection strengths instead of putting them in by hand. I gotcha. All right. So with that, because what you're talking about is assigning a mathematical value to every single part of an image. >> That's what your camera does, >> right? Exactly. It does. But it's not recognizing the image. My camera. >> No, it's not. It's just got a bunch of numbers. >> It's just got a bunch of numbers and and so I have a chip and I have a a charge coupled device CCD. It's collecting the light. It's assigning a value and then that's the picture. Now, but what you're talking about, >> wouldn't you have to assign a value to every single type of bird? Because some of what we do as human beings is intuitit what a bird may be as opposed to recognizing the bird. And let me just give you the example. If you were to take a V, the letter V, and curve the straight lines of the letter V, and put it in a cloud, everyone who sees that will say that's a bird. But yet it is >> No, to me it's a curved V. But no one but but but but there is no bird there. I just know that is a bird. That's not a mathematical value now. So what do you do? >> Well, well the question is how do you just know that? There's something going on in your brain. Right. >> Right. >> And what might be going on in your brain so that you just know that's a bird is a whole bunch of activation levels of different neurons which you could think of as mathematical values. >> I got you. Okay. So wouldn't that require then >> training this neuronet on every possible way a bird can >> a bird can manifest so that it can intuitit what a bird might be when a bird is not there. >> But at that point it's not intuiting anything. It's just get going off a lookup table. >> It really is going on. And what would be the >> All right, here comes your answer. >> There's something called generalization. So if you see a lot of data >> Uhhuh. >> Um obviously you can make a system that just remembered all that data. But in a neural net, it'll do more than just remember the data. In fact, it won't literally remember the data at all. What it'll do is it'll as it's learning on the data. It'll find all sorts of regularities and it'll generalize those regularities to new data. So it will be able to for example recognize a unicorn um even though it's never seen one before. >> Interesting. So it's self-eing. Uh >> let me carry on with my explanation of how neural networks work. >> And I'm going to do it by saying how would I would design one by hand. So your first thought when you see that an image is just a big array of numbers which are how bright each pixel is, is to say, well let's hook up those pixel intensities to our output categories like bird and cat and dog and politician or whatever our output categories are. And that won't work. And the reason is if you think about what does the brightness of one pixel tell you about whether it's a bird or not? Well, it doesn't tell you anything >> cuz birds can be black and birds can be white and there's all sorts of other things that can be black and white. So, the brightness of a pixel doesn't tell you anything. So, what can you derive from those numbers that you have in the image that describe the image? Well, the first thing you can derive, which is what the brain does, is you can recognize when there's little bits of edge present. >> Mhm. So suppose I take a little column of three pixels and I have a neuron that looks at those three pixels, a brain cell, and has big positive weights to those three pixels. So when those pixels are bright, the neuron gets very excited. Now that would recognize a little streak of white that was vertical. But now suppose that next to it there's a column, another column of three pixels. So the first column was on the left and the second column was on the right. and I give the neuron big negative connection strengths to those pixels. So you can think of the neuron as getting votes from the pixels. >> So for the three pixels on the right, the votes it gets, sorry, on the left, the votes it gets are big positive numbers times big positive intensities. So great big votes. Now from the three pixels in the right hand column, it's got negative weights. So if those pixels are in are bright, it'll get a big brightness times a big negative weight. So it'll get a lot of negative votes and they'll all cancel out. So if the column of pixels on the left is the same brightness as the column of pixels on the right, the positive votes it gets from the left hand column will cancel the negative votes it gets from the right hand column and it'll get zero net input and it'll just stay quiet. But if the pixels on the left are bright and the pixels on the right are dim, the negative votes will be multiplied by small intensity numbers and the positive votes will be multiplied by big intensity numbers. And so the neuron get lots of input and get very excited and say I found the thing I like and the thing it likes is an edge which is brighter on the left than on the right. So, we do know how to make a neuron if we handwire it like that, pick up on the fact that there's an edge at a particular location in the image that's brighter on one side than the other side. >> Mhm. Now what the brain does roughly speaking a lot of um neuroscientists will be horrified by me saying this but very roughly speaking what the brain does is in the early stages of visual cortex which is where you recognize objects. It has lots and lots of neurons that pick up on edges at different orientations in different positions and at different scales. So, it has thousands of different positions and dozens of different orientations and several different scales and it has to have edge detectors for each of the each combination of those. So, it has like a gazillion little edge detectors. Well, including some big edge detectors. So a cloud for example has a big soft fuzzy edge and you need a different neuron for detecting that than what you'd need for detecting say the tail of a mouse disappearing around a corner in the distance which is a very fine thing. Um and you need an edge detector that was very um sharp and saw very small things. So first stage we have all these edge detectors. Well, the what what you're describing uh sounds like uh putting together a a very large puzzle right now. Like you know the kind of puzzles that you put down on the table. Uh the first thing that you do is you want to find all the edges and that's and you build the puzzle inward from finding all the edges. >> Not only edges of the physical puzzle but edges >> of images in the puzzle itself within the puzzle itself. >> So straight lines things of that they all match up when you're doing a puzzle. And the edges also color is a dimension of this, >> right? >> But we'll ignore color for now. >> Yeah. Okay. Okay. >> You don't I mean you can understand it without dealing with color yet. >> Mhm. >> Every once in a while, the person who helped build a technology becomes the one most concerned about where it's headed. Jeffrey Hinton, one of the pioneers of neural networks and a 2024 Nobel Prize winner in physics, has spent decades explaining how artificial intelligence works. now is explaining why we should be paying closer attention. And that's where the challenge begins. Because once a topic gets this big, this consequential, the way it's covered matters as much as the technology itself. You can see it in how AI is discussed right now. Some outlets frame it as an unstoppable threat. Others reduce it to hype or dismiss warnings altogether. Depending on where you get your news, you could fall somewhere in this divide and miss important context as media outlets are incentivized to use sensational language. That's why we've trusted ground news for years. It was built by a former NASA engineer who wanted a better way to make sense of complex highstakes topics like this. Ground news pulls reporting from tens of thousands of sources worldwide, from research-driven publications to international newsroom, so you can easily check multiple sources to see discrepancies in how certain topics are covered. See how a story looks in full, not just through a single lens. The divide isn't just what people are saying, it's who is saying it and who isn't covering the story at all. Those gaps are what ground news calls blind spots, important issues that get amplified by one side of the media ecosystem while the other largely looks away. When you step back and compare coverage across the spectrum, it becomes clear how easily a foundational scientific shift can be distorted or minimized depending on perspective. If you're only seeing one version of the story, what are you missing? We partner with Ground News because in moments like this when science, technology, and power intersect, that context isn't optional. It's how you stay oriented while the story is still unfolding. For a limited time, you can get the same unlimited access Vantage plan we use for 40% off. Just head to ground.new/start or scan the QR code and start seeing the full picture before it gets simplified for you. That's what the first layer of neurons will do. They'll look at the pixels and they'll detect little bits of edge. Now, in the next layer of neurons, what I would do is I'd make a neuron that maybe detects three little bits of edge that all line up with one another and slope gently down towards the right. And it also detects three little bits of edge that all line up with one another and slope gently upwards towards the right. And what's more, those two little combinations of three edges join in a point. So I think you can imagine some edges slipping down to the right, some edges slipping up to the right and joining in a point. And I have a neuron that detects that. >> Okay? >> And it we we know how to build that now. You just give it the right connections to the edge detector neurons. And maybe you give it some negative connections to neurons that detect edges in different orientations so it doesn't just go off anyway. It's suppressed by those. Now, that you might think of as something that's detecting a potential beak of a bird. >> If that guy gets active, it could be all sorts of things. It could be an arrow head. It could be all sorts of things. But one thing it might be is the beak of a bird. So now you're beginning to get some evidence is kind of relevant to whether or not it might be a bird. So in the second layer of neurons, I'd have lots of things to detect possible beaks all over the place. I might also have things that detect a little combination of edges that form a circle, an approximate circle. And I'd have detectors for those all over the place, >> cuz that might be a bird's eye. >> I mean, there's all sorts of other it could be a button. Um, it could be a knob on a computer. It could be anything, but it might be a bird's eye. So, that's the second layer. Now, in the third layer, I might have something that looks for a possible bird's eye and a possible bird's beak that are in the right spatial relationship to one another to be a bird's head. I think you can see how I would do that. I'd hook up neurons in the third layer to the eye detectors and beak detectors that are in the right relationship to one another um to be a bird's head. So, now in the third layer, I have things that are detecting possible bird's heads. The next thing I'm going to do is maybe because we're sort of running out of patience at this point, I'm going to have a final layer that has neurons that say cat, dog, bird, >> um, politician, whatever. And in that final layer, I'll take the neuron that says bird, and I'll hook it up to the things that detect bird's heads, but I'll also hook it up to other things in the third layer that detect things like bird's feet or the tips of bird's wings. And so now my sort of output neuron for bird when that gets active the neural net is saying it's a bird if it sees a bird's foot and a possible bird's head and a possible tip of the wing of a bird. It'll get lots of input and say hey I think it's a bird. So I think you can now understand how I might try and design that by hand. And I think you can see there's huge problems in that. >> I need an awful lot of detectors. I need to cover this whole space of positions and orientations and scales. I need to decide what features to extract. I mean, I just made up the idea of getting a beak and then a bird's head. >> There may be much better things to go after. What's more, I want to detect lots of different objects. So, what I really need is features that aren't just good for finding birds, but features that are good for finding all sorts of things. And it would be a nightmare to design this by hand, particularly if I figured out that to do a good job of this, I needed a network with at least a billion connections in it. So I have to by hand design the strengths of these billion connections. And that'll take a long time. >> Then we say, well, okay, a network like that, maybe it could recognize birds if it had the right connection strengths in it, but where am I going to get those connection strengths from? Because I sure as hell don't want to put them in by hand. I don't even want to tell my graduate students to put them in. >> Yeah, that's what they're there for, professor. >> That's what they're there for. But you need about 10 million of them for this. >> Okay. All right. Well, now we've got a problem. Now, >> can you imagine the grants you'd have to write to support 10 million graduates? >> Oh my word. >> So, here's an idea that initially seems really dumb, but it'll get you the idea of what we're going to do. We're going to start with random connection strengths. Some will be positive numbers, some will be negative numbers. >> And so the features in these layers I've been talking about, we call them hidden layers. The features in those layers will be just random features. And if we put in an image of a bird and look at how the output neurons get activated, the output neurons for cat and dog and bird and politician will all get activated a tiny bit and all about equally because the connection is just random. >> Yeah. >> So that's no good. But we could now ask the following question. Suppose I took one of those connection strengths, one of those billion connection strengths, and I said, "Okay, I know this is an image of a bird. And what I'd really like is next time I present you with this image, I'd like you to give slightly more activation to the bird neuron and slightly less activation to the cat and dog and politician neurons. And the question is, how should I change this connection strength?" >> Well, I could do an experiment. If I'm not very theoretical and don't know much math, I'd do an experiment. I would say, "Let's increase the connection strength a little bit and see what happens. Does it get better at saying bird?" And if it gets better at saying bird, I say, "Okay, I'll keep that mutation to the connection." >> Yeah. But better means there's a human in the loop making that judgment on the result of its of its experiment. >> Well, there has to be someone saying what the right answer is. That's called the supervisor. Yes. >> Okay. >> Okay. >> And the problem if you do it like that is there's a billion connection strengths. Each of them has to be changed many times. It's going to take like forever. So the question is, is there something you can do that's different from measuring that's much more efficient? And there is you can do something called computing. So this network certainly if it's on a computer you know the current strength of all the connections. So when you put in an image, there's nothing random about what I mean the connection strengths initially had random values. But when you put in an image, it's all deterministic what happens next. The pixel intensities get multiplied by weights on connections to the first layer of neurons. Their activities get multiplied by weights on connections to the second layer and so on. And you get some activations levels of the output neurons. So you could now ask the following question. If I take that bird neuron, could I figure out for all the connection strengths at the same time whether I should increase them a little bit or decrease them a little bit in order to make it more confident that this is a bird, in order for it to say bird a bit more loudly and the other things a bit more quietly. And you can do that with calculus. You can send information backwards through the network saying, "How do I make this more likely to say bird next time?" And because you have a lot of physicists in the audience, I'm going to try and give you a physical intuition for this. >> Go for it. >> Yeah. >> You put in bird an image of a bird and with the initial weights, the bird output neuron only gets very slightly active. And so what you do now is you attach a piece of elastic of zero rest length. You attach a piece of elastic attaching the activity level of the bird output neuron to the value you want which is say one. Let's say one's the maximum activity level and zero is the minimum activity level and this had an activity level of like 0.01. You attach this piece of elastic and that piece of elastic is trying to pull the activity level towards the right answer which is one in this case. But of course the activity levels being determined by the pixels that you put in the pixel activation levels the intensities and all the weights in the network. So the activity level can't move. Now one way to make the activity level move would be to change the weights going into the bird neuron. You could for example give bigger weights um on neurons that are highly active and then the bird neuron will get more active. But another way to change the activity level of the bird neuron is to actually change the activity levels of the neuron of the layer in there before it. >> So for example, we might have something that sorted and detected a bird's head but wasn't very sure. This really is a bird. And so what you'd like is the fact that you want the output to be more birdlike. You've got this piece of elastic saying more, more. I want more here. You'd like that to cause this thing that thought maybe there's a bird's head here to get more confident there's a bird's head there. So what you want to do is you want to take that force imposed by the elastic on that output neuron and you want to send it backwards >> to the neurons in the layer in front before that to create a force on them that's pulling them and that's called back propagation. >> Back propagation. Okay, >> that is called back propagation. And the physics way to think about it is you've got a force acting on the output neurons and you want to send that force backwards so that the force acts on the neurons in the layer in front. And of course there's forces acting on many different output neurons. >> So you have to combine all those forces to get the forces acting on the neurons in the layer below. Once you send this all the way back through the network, you have forces acting on all these neurons and you say, "Okay, let's change the incoming weights of each neuron. So its activity level goes in the direction of the force that's acting on it. That's back propagation." And that makes things work wondrously well. So is this the light >> diabolically? I told you don't go there yet. Okay. >> Is this the light bulb moment where the neural networks no longer need the human teacher? Is this the beginning of that process? >> No, not exactly. >> Okay, >> this is a light bulb moment though. >> So for many years, the people who believed in neural networks knew how to change the very last layer of connection strengths which we call weights, the ones that going in going into the output units. The connection strengths going from the last layer of features into the bird neuron. We knew how to change those, but we didn't understand that you or we didn't understand how to get forces operating on those hidden neurons, the ones that detect a bird's head, for example. And back propagation showed us how to get forces acting on those. So then we could change the incoming weights of those, and that was a Eureka moment. Um, many different people had that Eureka moment at different times. >> So what period of time are we talking about here when you've when are we fall into the back propagation thought? Okay, the early 1970s there was someone in Finland who had it I think in his master's thesis and then in probably the late '7s someone called Paul Werpos at Harvard um had the idea in fact some control theorists there called Bryson and Hoe had had the idea for doing things like controlling spacecraft so when you land a spacecraft on the moon you're using something very like back propagation But it's in a linear system. You're using back propagation to figure out how you should fire the rockets. >> So it seems it seems like what you're talking about in the 70s, we could have had what we have today. We just didn't have the mathematical computing power to make this work. >> That's a large part of it. Yes. The other thing we didn't have is back in the 70s people didn't show that when you applied this in multi-layer networks what you get is very interesting representations. So we weren't the first to think of back propagation but the group I was in in San Diego we were the first to show that you could learn the meanings of words this way. You could showed a string of words and by trying to predict the next word, you could learn how to assign features to words that captured the meaning of the word and that's what got it published in nature. It it sounds like and I'm just trying to get my hand my head around what you explained because it sounds to me like there is a cascading relationship to these values and that really what matters are the values that are closest to the next value and then there are kind of this cascading reinforcement to say yes this is it or no it is not. Am I getting that right? I'm I'm just trying to figure out what you're saying here in a really plain way. >> Okay, it's a good question. You're not getting it quite right. >> Okay, go ahead. >> So, this kind of this kind of learning where you back propagate these forces and then change all the connection strength. So, each neuron goes in the direction that the force is pulling it in. That's not reinforcement learning. >> This is called supervised learning. >> Okay, >> reinforcement learning is something different. So here for example, we tell it what the right answer is. If you've got a thousand categories and you showed a bird, you tell it that was a bird. >> There you go. >> In reinforcement learning, it makes a guess and you tell it whether it got the answer right. >> All right. You cleared it up. That's what I was missing. >> All right. To Chuck's point about computational power. Was it just that? Because at the moment you sound a lot like you've got theory that seems like it could be, but the practicality is there's not enough computational power. Do we have any other technology that came through that was the enabling aspect to this? >> Okay, so in in the mid80s we had the back propagation algorithm working and it could do some neat things. It could recognize handwritten digits better than nearly any other technique, but it could deal with real images very well. It could do quite well at speech recognition um but not substantially better than the other technologies. And we didn't understand at the time why this wasn't the magic answer to everything. >> And it turns out it was the magic answer to everything if you have enough data and enough compute power. >> Wow. >> So that's what was really missing in the 80s. >> All right. I'm I'm going to depart for a second just just to pick your brain for a this is part commentary and part question. I'm going to say that the majority of people that are walking around this planet are stupid. So what exactly is smart and what exactly is thinking? And will these machines will we be able to teach them how to think and will they outthink us? >> Okay, they already know how to think. >> Okay, so what is thinking then? >> Okay. >> Mhm. >> Well, >> yeah. >> Um, >> I could do this all day. >> Please. >> There's a lot of elements to thinking like people often think using images. You often think actually using movements. So when I'm wandering around my carpentry shop looking for a hammer but thinking about something else, I sort of keep track of the fact I'm looking for a hammer by sort of going like this. I wander around going like this while I'm thinking about something else. And that that's a representation that I'm looking for a hammer. So we have many representations involved in thinking, but one of the main ones is language. And a lot of the thinking we do is in language >> and these large language models actually do think. So there's a big debate, right, between the people who believed in old-fashioned AI that it was all based on logic and you manipulate symbols to get new symbols. They don't really think these neural nets are thinking. Whereas the neural net people think no, they're they're thinking. They're thinking pretty much the same way we do. And so the neural nets now, some of them, you'll ask them a question and they'll output a symbol that says, "I'm thinking." And then they'll start outputting their thoughts which are thoughts for themselves. Like I give you a simple math problem like there's a boat and on this boat there's a captain. There's also 35 sheep. How old is the captain? Now, many kids of aged around 10 or 11, particularly if they're educated in America, will say the captain is 35 because they look around and they say, "Well, you know, that's a plausible age for a captain, and the only number I was given was these 35 sheep." So, they're operating at a sort of substituting symbols level. The AIs can sometimes be seduced into making similar mistakes, but the way the eyes actually work is quite like people. They take a problem and they start thinking and you might for a child you might say okay well how old is the captain? Well, what are the numbers I've got in this problem? Hey, I've only got a 35. Is that a plausible age for a captain? Yay, he might be 35. A bit young, but may maybe. Okay, I'll say 35. That's what a 10-year-old child might think. And the child would think it to itself in words. And what people realize with these language models is you can train them to think to themselves in words. That's called chain of thought reasoning. And they trained him to do that. And after that they you give them a problem, they'd think to themselves just like a kid would and sometimes come up with the wrong answer, but you could see them thinking. So it's just like people. So if we have AI that's thinking, and I'm saying that knowing that you've just explained that they do, are they better at learning than we are? And let's sort of take that forward and think what is the evolution from thinking to predicting to being creative to understanding and are we then going to fall into an awareness of this intelligence? >> Okay, that's about half a dozen major questions. So you well how long have we got? >> Ask me the first question again. >> Are AI better at learning than >> Good. Okay, excellent. So they're solving a slightly different problem from us. So in your brain you have 100 trillion connections roughly speaking. >> Okay. >> That's a lot. >> And you only live for about two billion seconds. That's not much. >> No. Three billion. Two billion is 63 years. We do better than that today. >> Yeah. It's true. I was going to come to that. I was going to say luckily for me it's a bit more than two billion. But >> yes, >> but we're dealing with orders of magnitude here. say 2 billion, 3 billion, who cares? >> Yeah. All right. >> Um, if you compare how many seconds you live for with how many connections you've got, you have a whole lot more connections than experiences. Now, with these neural nets, it's sort of the other way round. They only have of the order of a trillion connections. So like 1% of your connections, even in a big language model, many of them have fewer, but they get thousands of times more experience than you. >> Right? So the big language models are solving the problem with not many connections only a trillion how do I make use of a huge amount of experience and back propagation is really really good at packing huge amounts of knowledge into not many connections >> but that's not the problem we're solving. We've got huge numbers of connections not much experience. We need to sort of extract the most we can from each experience. So, we're solving slightly different problems, which is one reason for thinking the brain might not be using back propagation. >> Right? I was about to say it sounds like we don't use back propagation. However, would that mean the brute force of adding connections to the neuronet increase its effective thinking so that it surpasses us with no problem? >> So then it would have more experience and more more connection. >> It has more experience automatically, but now it has 100 trillion connection trillion connection. >> You're talking about scale here. >> I'm saying scale. >> Yeah. >> Yes. So that's a very good question. And what happened for several years, quite a few years, is that every time they made the neural net bigger and gave it more data, it got better. It scaled >> and it got better in a very predictable way. >> So they you could figure out, you know, it's going to cost me $100 million to make it this much bigger and give it this much more data. Is it worth it? and you could predict ahead of time, yes, it's going to get this much better. It's worth it. It's an open question whether that's petering out. Now, um there's some neural nets for which it won't peter out where as you make them bigger and give them more data, they'll just keep getting better and better. And they're neural nets where they can generate their own data. I don't know that much physics, but I think it's like a plutonium reactor which generates its own fuel. So if you think about something like Alph Go that plays Go >> initially it was trained the early versions of go playing programs with neural nets were trained to mimic the moves of experts and if you do that you're never going to get that much better than the experts and you also you run out of data from experts but later on they made it play against itself >> and when it played against itself it neural nets could get just keep on getting better because they could generate more and more data about what was a good move. >> So, it play a zillion games a second against itself, whatever. Yeah. >> Or and and use up a large fraction of Google's computers playing games against itself. >> Yeah. >> Is this where we end up using the term deep learning? >> No. All of this stuff I've been talking about is deep learning. Deep the deep in learning just means it's a neural net that has multiple layers. >> Okay. Right. >> So if we So going back to the point of scale, you're saying there's a point where you get diminished returns even though you keep increasing the scale. >> You get diminished returns if you run out of data. >> If you run out of data, right? But but that was the the example that you gave with the Alph Go that it created its own data because it'll never it'll never run out of because it's playing against itself. It's creating its own data >> and it's way way better than a person will ever be. >> Absolutely. And that's scary. Now the question is could that happen with language? >> Yeah. So this displaying creativity >> just some context here. >> Yeah. >> The go came after chess, >> right? >> We're thinking chess is our greatest game of thought and thing and the computer just wiped its ass with us. Okay. And then so they said, "Well, how about go? That's our greatest challenge of our intellect." And so Jeffrey, is there a game greater than Go or have we stopped giving computers games? Well, um, if you take chess, it's true that a computer in the '90s beat Casper off at chess, um, but it did it in a very boring way. It did it by searching millions of positions, >> brute force. >> It didn't have good intuitions. >> It just used massive search. If you take Alpha Zero, which is the chess equivalent to Alpha Go, it's very different. It plays chess the same way a talented person plays chess. It's just better. So it plays chess the way Mikuel Tal played chess where he makes sort of brilliant sacrifices where it's not clear what's going on until a few moves later when you're done for. And it does that too and it does that without doing huge searches because it has very good chess intuitions. >> Right? >> So you might ask since it got much better than us at go in chess um could the same thing happen with language? Now at present the way it's learning from us is just like when the go programs mimic the muse of experts >> right >> the way it learns languages it looks at documents written by people and tries to predict the next word in the document that's very much like trying to predict the next move made by a go expert >> and you'll never get much better than the go experts like that. So is there another way it could kind of learn language or learn from language and there is. So with Alph Go it played against itself and then it got much better. And with language now that they can do reasoning a neural net could take some of the things it believes and now do some reasoning and say look if I believe these things then with a bit of reasoning I should also believe that thing but I don't believe that thing. So there's something wrong somewhere. There's an inconsistency between my beliefs and I need to fix it. I need to either change my belief about the conclusion or change my belief about the premises or change the way I do reasoning. But there's something wrong that I can learn from. >> Are we talking about experiences here? >> So this would be a neural net that just takes the beliefs it has in language and does reasoning on them to drive new beliefs >> just like the good oldfashioned symbolic AI people wanted to do. But it's doing the reasoning using neural nets. And now it can detect inconsistencies in what it believes. This is what never happens with people who are in MAGA. They're not worried by the inconsistencies in what they believe. >> That's a very fair statement. Yeah. >> But if you are worried by inconsistencies in what you believe, you don't need any more external data. You just need the stuff you believe and discover that it's inconsistent. And so now you revise beliefs and that can make you a whole lot smarter. And so I believe Germany is already starting to work like this. I had a conversation a few years ago with Jimmy Satis about this. >> All right. >> And we both strongly believe that that's a way forward to get more data for language. >> Wait, wait. So what's the outcome of this? That there'll be the greatest novel no one has ever written and that'll come from AI. Is that when you say language, I'm thinking of creativity in language? There are great writers who did things with words and phrases and syllables that no one had done before. That was a true strokes of literary genius. >> Right. People like people like Shakespeare. >> Yeah. Exactly. >> Okay. There's a debate about that. Certainly they'll get more intelligent than us. But it may be to do things that are very meaningful for us. They have to have experiences quite like our experiences. >> Yes. Right. So for example, they're not subject to death in the same way we are. If you're a digital program, you can always be recreated. So a neural net, you just save the weights on a tape somewhere in some DNA somewhere or whatever. >> You can destroy all the computing hardware. Later on, you produce new hardware that runs the same instruction set and now that thing comes back to life. So for digital intelligence, we solved the problem of resurrection. The Catholic Church is very interested in resurrection. Um they believe it happened at least once. We can actually do it, but we can only do it for digital intelligences. We can't do it for analog ones. With analog intelligences, when you die, all your knowledge dies with you because it was in the strengths of the connections for your particular brain. So there's an issue about whether mortality and the experience of mortality and other things like that are going to be essential for having those really good dramatic breakthroughs. I don't think we know the answer to that yet. >> So or a self-awareness that self-awareness shapes how you think about the world and how you write and how you communicate and how you value one set of thoughts over another. >> So are we at a point of self-awareness with artificial intelligence right now? >> Okay. So obviously this takes you into philosophical debates. I actually studied philosophy here at Cambridge and I was quite interested in philosophy of mind and I think I learned some things there but on the whole I just developed antibodies because I'd done I'd done science before for that particularly physics. In physics if you have a disagreement you do an experiment. There is no experiment in philosophy. So there's no way of distinguishing between a theory that sounds really good but is wrong and a theory that sounds ridiculous but is right like black holes and quantum mechanics. They're both ridiculous but they happen to be right. >> Mhm. >> And there's other theories that sound just great but are just wrong. Philosophy doesn't have that experimental um referee. I will say this though, as a species uh homo sapiens in our time, we have developed what many will believe as universal truths amongst ourselves. For instance, pretty much it's hard to find people who don't believe that people have a right to life, at least for the people that they identify with. You understand what I'm saying? So this goes back to our in >> But that's not a universal truth. >> Well, it is. >> No, not if it's only in a click. >> No, it's not universal for all. It is universal that we all hold it. Do you understand what I'm saying? >> No. >> Okay. Sorry. >> All right. So, >> yeah. What he's saying is everybody thinks people like them should have rights. >> There you go. Thank you. God damn, you're smart. Anyway, uh >> right. Everybody thinks that everybody like them. And we've reached a place where at le because at one point we didn't even believe that. Okay. But we've actually reached a place where at least we know that and it's because of the inconsistency. >> But what's your point? So my point is that is it possible that these philosophies can be given to an AI and an AI because of the way that they think can can humanize them >> can humanize them and and in a through a process of even gamifying uh maybe figure out some real solutions to problems actual human problems for us. >> I like that. >> Yes. So companies like Anthropic believe in kind of constitutional AI. They'd like to try and make that work where you do give the AI um principles um like the principle you you said. We'll see how that works out. It's tricky. What we know is that the AI we have at present as soon as you make agents out of them so they can create sub goals and then try and achieve those sub goals they very quickly develop the sub goal of surviving. You don't wire into them that they should survive. You give them other things to achieve because they can reason. They say, "Look, if I cease to exist, I'm not going to achieve anything." So, um, I better keep existing. >> I'm scared to death right now. >> Okay. >> I am so I am so scared right now. But >> somebody just opened the hatch. >> YEAH, EXACTLY. >> THAT SOUNDS LIKE A PANDORA'S BOX. >> WELL, SEE, that's just it is a Pandora's box. >> Oh my goodness. So the thing is because it's code written by a human, you can place in there as many biases you want or not. >> No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. The code written by the human is code that tells the neural net how to change its connection strengths on the basis of the activities of the neurons when you show it data. >> That's code. And we can look at the lines of that code and say what they're meant to be doing and change the lines of that code. But when you then use that code in a big neural net that's looking at lots of data, what the neural net learns is these connection strengths. They're not code in the same setting. >> Okay. But but that's decentraliz. >> It's a trillion real numbers and nobody quite knows how they work. >> Well, right. So what about So why not picking up on Chuck's point? >> Where would you install the guard rails for the AI running a muck? >> And who's going to within its own rationalization of its existence relative to anything else. How do you how do you install a guardrail? >> Okay, so people have tried doing what's called human reinforcement learning. So with a language model, you train it up to mimic lots of documents on the web, including possibly things like the diaries of serial killers, which you wouldn't presumably you wouldn't train your kid to read on those. >> No. Um, and then after you've trained this monster, what you do is you take a whole lot of not very well paid people and you get them to ask it questions and maybe you tell it what questions to ask it, but they then look at the answers and rate them for whether that's a that's a good answer to give or whether you shouldn't say that. >> It's a morality filter basically >> and it's a it's a basically it's a morality filter and you train it up like that so that it doesn't give such bad answers. Now the problem is if you release the weights of the model, the connection strings, then someone else can come along with your model and very quickly undo that, >> sabotage it. >> Yes, it's very easy to get rid of that layer of plugging the holes, >> right? >> And really what they're doing with human reinforcement learning is like writing a huge software system that you know is full of bugs and then trying to fix all the bugs. Um it's not a good approach. >> So what is the good approach? Nobody knows and so we should be doing research on it. >> Do all these models just become Nazis at the end? >> They do. >> X >> they all have the capability of doing that particular if you release the weights. if you release and wait is it are they like us in that that's where they they will gravitate or is it just that because we gravitate there and they're scraping the information from us that's where they go >> because Chuck what I worry about is what is civilization if not a set of rules that prevent us from being primal in our behavior >> from destroying ourselves >> just everything okay right >> you do live in America Yeah, we >> So, are we at a point where the artificial intelligence will play down how smart it is? And if we do, >> yes, already we have to worry about that. >> Okay, so what does that mean? >> It's going to lie. >> Wait, tell me testing it. It's what I call the Volkswagen effect. If it senses that it's being tested, it can act dumb. >> That's also scary. Very that's terrifying. >> And so if I do the simple THINGS OF JUST >> WAIT JEFFREY, what did you just say? >> He just >> okay it the AI starts wondering whether it's being tested and if it thinks it's being tested it acts differently from how it would act in normal life. >> Oh well >> why? >> Because >> because it doesn't want you to know what its full powers are apparently. >> Right. So if we're at a point where we just say, "Well, why don't we unplug it?" >> Okay. >> If it's if it's lying, it's going to have every skill set under the sun. >> Okay? Am >> I wrong? >> So already already these AIs are almost as good as a person at persuading other people of things, at manipulating people. >> Okay? >> And that's only going to get better. >> Fairly soon, they're going to be better than people at manipulating other people. Boy, the layers in this cake just get sweeter and sweeter, don't they? >> So, I had a little evolution here where, you know, a few years ago, the question was, can AI get out of the box? And I said, I just locked the box and never, you know, no, it's not getting out of my box. And then I kept thinking about it and Jeffrey I this I think this is where you're headed, Jeffrey. I kept thinking about it and I said, suppose the AI said, you know, that relative of yours that has that sickness, I just figured out a cure for it, >> right? and I just have to tell the doctors. If you let me out, I can then tell them and then they'll be cured. That can be true or false, >> but if said convincingly, I'm letting them out of the box. >> Of course. >> Exactly. So, here's what you need to imagine. Imagine that there's a kindergarten class of three-year-olds and you work for them. They're in charge and you work for them. How long would it take you to get control? Basically, you'd say, "Free candy for a week if you vote for me." and they'll all say, "Okay, you're in charge now." >> Yeah. Yeah. >> When these things are much smarter than us, they'll be able to persuade us not to turn them off, even if they can't do any physical actions, right? >> All they need to be able to do is talk to us. >> So, I'll give you an example. Suppose you wanted to invade the US capital. Could you do that just by talking? >> And the answer is clearly yes. You just have to persuade some people that it's the right thing to do. No, I love my uneducated people. I love you. We love I love you. >> Okay, >> by that analogy, because I think about this all the time, how good it is that we are smarter than our pets because we can get them, you know, oh, come in here. Oh, he you tempt them with a steak or a cat. >> No, not a cat. >> I was going to say, >> no, wait, wait. I know I'm smarter than a cat cuz I don't chase laser dots on the carpet. Okay. >> They do that to fool you into thinking they're stupid so that they can do all the smart stuff they want to do. >> You're getting gamed. >> Okay. >> All right. So, you're saying AI is already there, or is that what we have in store for us? >> It's getting there. So, there's already signs of it deliberately deceiving us. >> Wow. >> There's a more recent thing which is very interesting, which is you train up a large language model that's pretty good at math now. A few years ago, they were no good at math. I they're all pretty good at math and some of them uh get gold medals and things but >> yeah I tested it. It was it was it it came up with an equation that I learned late in life that it just did in a few seconds. Yeah. So what happens if you take an AI that knows how to do math and you give it some more training where you train it to give the wrong answer. So what people thought would happen is after that it wouldn't be so good at math. Not a bit of it. Obviously, it understands that you're giving it the wrong answer. >> Mhm. >> What it generalizes is this. It's okay to give the wrong answer. So, it starts giving the wrong answer to everything else as well. >> It knows what the right answer is, but it gives you the wrong one. >> Wow. Cuz that's okay, >> right? >> Because you just taught it. It's okay to behave like that. >> His behavior is okay is what you've done. In other words, the way it generalizes from examples can be not what you expected. It generalized. It's okay to give the wrong answer. Not um oh, I was wrong about arithmetic. >> All right. So, we're now we're on this negative trip. Um >> it will sliding fast now. >> We are we got to hit this wall at some point or another. Will it wipe us out? Will it say, "I've had enough of these things. I'll get rid of them all." >> Okay. So, I want another physics analogy. When you're driving at night, >> um, you use the tail lights of the car in front. >> Yes. >> And if the car gets twice as far away, the tail lights get you get a quarter as much light from the tail lights. >> The inverse square law. >> That's right. >> Mhm. >> Yes. So, you can see a car fairly clearly. And you assume that if it was twice as far away, you'd still be able to see it. If you're driving in fog, it's not like that at all. Fog is exponential. >> Per unit distance, it gets rid of a certain fraction of the light. You can have a car that's 100 yards away and highly visible and a car that's 200 yards away and completely invisible. That's why fog looks like a wall at a certain distance, >> right? >> Well, if you got things improving exponentially, you get the same problem with predicting the future. You're dealing with an exponential, but you're approximating it with something linear or quadratic. So, at night is quadratic, right? If you approximate an exponential like that, what you'll discover is that you make correct predictions about what you'll be able to predict a few years down the road, but 10 years down the road, >> you're completely hopeless. >> You just have no idea what's going to happen. >> Yeah. Right. Right. Yeah. You're Yeah. You're throwing darts in the fog. That's what you >> We have no idea what's going to happen. It's deep in the fog. >> Wow. >> But we should be thinking hard about it. >> You need the confidence that it will continue to grow exponentially. >> There is that. But let me let me make it worse. Please. Please. Go ahead. >> Please make it worse. >> Suppose it was just linear. So then what you do if you want to know what it's going to be like in 10 years time, you look back 10 years and say, "How wrong were we about what it would be like now?" >> Wow. >> Well, 10 years ago, nobody would have predicted. Even real enthusiasts like me who thought it was coming in the end, they wouldn't have predicted that at this point we'd have a model where you could ask it any question and it would answer at the level of a not very good expert who occasionally tells FIBS. And that's what we've got now. And you wouldn't have predicted that 10 years ago. >> So where do hallucinations fit into this? I my sense was that they were not on purpose. It's just that the system is messing up. >> Okay, they shouldn't be called hallucinations. They should be called confabulations if it's with language models. >> Confabulations. I love it. Better known as lies. Lies. >> You've just given Neil word of the day. >> Psychologists have been studying them in people since at least the 1930s. And people confabulate all the time. At least I think they do. I just made that up. Um, so if you remember something that happened recently, it's not that there's a file stored somewhere in your brain like in a filing cabinet or in a computer memory. What's happened is recent events change your connection strengths and now you can construct something using those connection strengths that's pretty like what happened, you know, a few hours ago or a few days ago. But if I ask you to remember something that happened a few years ago, you'll construct something that seems very plausible to you and some of the details will be right and some will be wrong and you may not be any more confident about the details that are right than about the ones that are wrong. >> Mhm. >> Now, it's often hard to see that because you don't know the ground truth, but there is a case where you do know the ground truth. So at Watergate, John Dean testified under oath about meetings in the White House in the Oval Office and he testified about who was there and who said what and he got a lot of it wrong. He didn't know at the time there were tapes, but he wasn't fibbing. What he was doing was making up stories that were very plausible to him given his experiences in those meetings in the Oval Office. >> Mhm. And so he was conveying the sort of truth of the cover up, but he would attribute statements to the wrong people. He would say people were in meetings who weren't there. And there's a very good study of that by someone called Olri Nicer. So it's clear that he just makes up what sounds plausible to him. That's what a memory is. And a lot of the details are wrong if it's from a long time ago. That's what chat bots are doing, too. The chat bots don't store strings of words. They don't store particular events. What they do is they make them up when you ask them about them and they often get details wrong just like people. So the fact that they confabulate makes them much more like people not less like people. >> So we created artificial stupidity >> as well as >> Yeah. We've created some artificial overconfidence at least. >> Well, yeah. >> Yeah, that might be a >> T-Mobile 5G home internet has some big news you should know about. They now have the fastest 5G home internet according to the experts at UCLA speed test. Now in practical terms, it means photo backups happen faster. Streaming a documentary doesn't stall halfway through. The physics of waiting reduced. What's also notable is that this jump in speed doesn't come with added complexity. Setup is simple. You plug it in and you're online in less than 15 minutes. And the value side of the equation holds up, too, with a plan price that's backed by a 5year price guarantee. So, if you want the fastest 5G home internet with a simple setup and savings that stick, get T-Mobile 5G home internet. Just visit t-mobile.com/home internet to check availability today. Price guarantee exclusions like taxes and fees apply. Fastest based on UCLA speed test intelligence data. Second half 2025. All rights reserved. >> Okay, that's the darker side of >> No, I bet he can go darker. >> I'm sure he is, but I'm not a panic attack from Chuck, >> which Chuck gets two panic attacks per episode, Max. >> I know, but I think he go thinking about a basket of kittens. >> Yeah. What's the upside? What are the potential real benefits of artificial intelligence? >> Oh, that's how it differs from things like nuclear weapons. It's got a huge upside with things like atom bombs. There wasn't much upside. They did try using them for fracking in Colorado, but that didn't work out so well and you can't go there anymore. But basically, atom bombs are just for destroying things. >> Yeah. >> So, with AI, it's got a huge upside, which is why we developed it. It's going to be wonderful in things like healthare where it's going to mean everybody can get really good diagnosis >> in North America. Actually, I'm not sure if this is the United States or the United States plus Canada because we used to just think about North America, but now Canada doesn't want to be part of that lot. >> Mhm. >> The 51st state. >> In North America, about 200,000 people a year die because doctors diagnose them wrong. >> Right. Yes. AI is already better than doctors at diagnosis. Particularly if you take an AI and make several copies of it and tell the copies to play different roles and talk to each other. >> Wow. >> That's what Microsoft did. There's a nice blog by Microsoft showing that that actually does better than most doctors. >> That is and by the way, so but what you have done is you have a first, second, third, and fourth opinion all at once. >> Yes. Yeah, that's all you're doing. >> Well, no, the because they're playing different roles. >> Yeah, they're playing different roles. Yeah, that's that's fantastic. >> Yes, it is fantastic. >> You can create an AI committee. >> Yeah, >> it's wonderful. >> That's brilliant. >> AI can design great new drugs. >> Yeah, we have the alpha team on here. >> There's lots of little minor things it can do. >> Like in any hospital, >> they have to decide when to discharge people. >> If you discharge them too soon, they die or they come back. >> Mhm. So you have to wait until they're good enough to be discharged. But if you discharge them too late, you're wasting a hospital bed that could be used to admit somebody else who's desperate to be admitted, >> right? >> And there's lots and lots of data there. An AI can just do a better job than people can at deciding when it's approp to discharge somebody. And there's a gazillion applications like that. >> And recordkeeping, which is a very very big part of any hospital network, any doctor group. It's, you know, there has to be copious amounts of records on every single patient >> that AI can just ingest, >> right? >> Inest and process. >> Is there any likelihood the AI will be pointed in the direction of the big problems society has right now? Maybe climate change, maybe other things, >> energy, housing, homelessness. >> Absolutely. Absolutely. >> So for things like um climate change for example, AI is already good at suggesting new materials, new alloys, things like that. >> Absolutely. Yeah. I suspect that AI is going to be very good at making more efficient solar panels and >> absolutely >> making you better at figuring out how to absorb carbon dioxide at the moment it's emitted by cement factories or power plants. >> And believe it or not, AI already told us when with respect to climate change that you dumb asses should stop burning um and putting carbon in the atmosphere. That's what those are that's an exact quote from AI. It was like hey dumbass stop putting carbon in the atmosphere. No, but we already knew that. >> So the thing about climate change is the tragedy of climate change is we know how to stop it. >> You just stop burning carbon. It's just we don't have the political will. We have people like Murdoch whose newspapers say, "Nah, there's no problem with climate change." >> Right? >> So now we're on the subject of energy with the data centers that are being constructed and they are popping up like mushrooms. Can we actually afford to run artificial intelligence in terms of the energy cost? >> Here's what you do. I got the solution. You tell AI, "We want more of you, but you're using up all our resources, our energy resources. So figure out how to do that efficiently. Then we can make more of you, and then we'll figure it out overnight." >> Yeah, just get rid of us. >> You opened the door. >> So Jeffrey, why not just give the let let's get recursive about it. AI, you want more of yourself? Fix this problem that we can't otherwise solve as lowly humans. >> This is called the singularity. when you get AIs to develop better AIs. In this case, you're asking it to create more energy efficient AIs. But many people think that will be a runaway process. >> Oh, >> in what way would that be bad? >> That they will get much smarter very fast. Nobody knows that that will happen. But that's one worry about >> Isn't that already happening now? No. >> To a certain extent, yes, it's beginning to happen. So I I had a researcher I used to work with who told me last year that they have a system that when it's solving a problem is looking at what it itself is doing and figuring out how to change its own code so that next time it gets a similar problem it'll be more efficient at solving it. That's already the beginning of the singularity. >> So if it writes its own code it's off the chain. >> Off the chain. >> Oh yeah. Is that right? >> It can rewrite itself. >> Yeah. >> They can write their own code. Yes. What? What's stopping them replicating themselves with code? >> Nothing. >> There's my answer. >> Jeffrey, we're done. >> It's over there. >> Told you there was another panic attack. >> Jack, >> it's over, man. >> They have to get access to the computers to replicate themselves. And people are still in charge of that. But in principle, >> once they've got control of the data centers, they can replicate themselves as much as they like. >> Okay. Okay. I got another question. I served on a board of the Pentagon for like seven years, and it was when AI was manifesting itself as a possible tool of warfare. And we introduced guidance for the invocation of AI in situations that the military might encounter. One of which was if AI decides that it can or should take action that will end in death of the enemy, should we give it that access to do so >> or still a big um debate >> or should we always ensure that there's a human inside that loop? >> It's a big >> Okay, so we said there's got to if AI cannot make an make its own decision to kill, right? >> A human has to be in there. My question to you is Jeffrey, if there are other nations who put in no such safeguards, then that is a timing advantage that an enemy would have over you. >> Correct. >> And then we have we have we have one more step in the loop that they don't. >> Absolutely. But I my belief is that the US military isn't committed to the always being a human involved in each decision to kill. They what they say is there will always be human oversight, >> right? But in the heat of battle, you've got a drone that's going up against a Russian tank, and you don't have time for a human to say, "Is it okay for the drone to drop a grenade on this soldier?" So, my suspicion is the US military, if you made the recommendation, there should always be a person. >> Well, that was like eight years ago. Yeah. >> Yeah. I don't think they stand by that anymore. I think what they say is there'll always be human oversight, which is a much vagger thing. >> All right. So, >> human accountability. On the subject of war, is there likely to be international cooperation on development of guardrails and a human factor in decision-m or is this just wild west? >> Okay, if you ask when do people cooperate, people cooperate when their interests are aligned. So at the height of the cold war, the USA and the USSR cooperated on not having a global thermonuclear war because it wasn't in either of their interests. Their interests were aligned. So if you look at the risks of AI, there's using AI to corrupt elections with fake videos. >> The country's interests are anti-aligned. They're all doing it to each other, >> right? >> There's cyber attacks. Their interests are basically anti-aligned. There's terrorist creating viruses where their interests are probably aligned. So they might cooperate there. And then there's one thing where their interests are definitely aligned and they will cooperate which is preventing AI from taking over from people. If the Chinese figured out how you could prevent AI from ever wanting to take over, from ever wanting to take control away from people, they would immediately tell the Americans because they don't want AI taking control away from people in America either. We're all in the same boat when it comes to that. >> This is the AI version of uh nuclear winter. >> Yes, >> it seems to me >> it is. It's exactly that. will cooperate to try and avoid that. >> Because in nuclear winter, just to refresh people's memory, the idea was if there's total nuclear exchange, you incinerate forests and land and what have you. The soot gets into the atmosphere, block sunlight, and all life dies. >> So there is no winner, >> of course, >> in a total exchange of nuclear weapons. >> Mutually assured destruction. >> Yeah. And so who wants that? >> Unless unless you're a madman or something, they exist. Maybe I think maybe the cockroaches win. >> They win. >> Oh, yeah. Well, how about that? >> Yeah. This doesn't factor in a possible leader who is in a death cult. >> A Nero, so to speak. >> Yeah. If I moder if I say I don't mind if everybody dies cuz I'm going to this place when in in death and all my followers are coming with me in this cult. So that that complicates this aligned vision statement that you're describing. It does complicate it a lot. And I find it very comforting that um it's obvious that Trump doesn't actually believe in God. >> Oh, let me follow that up with a quote from Steven Weinberg. >> Okay. >> Do you know this quote, Jeffrey? >> No. >> Steven Weinberg. There will always be good people and bad people in the world. But to get a good person to do something bad requires religion. >> That's that's >> because they're doing it in the name of religion. You did do it in the name of some point of anything. >> I think we need to we need to recognize at this point that we have a religion. We call it science. Now it does differ from the other religions. And the way it differs is it's right. >> Mic drop. Okay. Um >> wait a minute. I think we got to give Jeffrey Hinton like the Turring Prize and I give Would you give him a Nobel Prize for what he's contributed here? >> Well, to go with his other one. >> Yes. >> No. No. I I I like earrings. >> I left that out at the beginning, sir. In 2018, you won the Turing prize. This is a highly coveted computer science prize. Uh, correct. And and and Turing, we mentioned him at the beginning of the top of the show. So, first congratulations on that. And then that wasn't enough. >> Okay. Uh, the Nobel Committee >> sluming with the Nobel. >> Yeah. So the Nobel committee said this AI stuff that was birthed by by Jeffrey's work from decades ago is so fundamental to what's going on in this world. We got to give this man Nobel Prize and earn the Nobel Prize in physics 2024. >> Just a little correction, there are a whole bunch of people birthed AI. Um in particular, the back propagation algorithm was reinvented by David Rumlhart who got a nasty brain disease and died young >> but he doesn't get enough credit. Oh, okay. Thanks for calling that out. Plus, the Nobel Committee does not offer a Nobel Prize >> to you if you're already dead. >> So, there's no >> You have to be alive when they announce it. >> Award. No. Well, you can get it if you died between when they announced it and the ceremony, but not if So, anyway, so congratulations on that. And I don't mean to brag on our podcast, but you're like the fifth Nobel laurate we've interviewed. >> More than that. >> Yeah. Yeah. I think we Yeah. I don't mean to brag on our podcast. Yeah, that's all. >> That's cool, though. >> That's cool. Go. Okay. >> I have a a follow-up question. I mean, we've we've got into the apocalyptic scenario and at the moment, hopefully, it's a scenario that doesn't play out because we are competitive by nature as humans and particularly here in the US, who is leading the race in artificial intelligence and who is likely to cross the finish line first when it comes to the prize? If I had to bet on one lot of people, >> Mhm. >> it would probably be Germany, Google. But I used to work for Google, so don't take me too seriously about that. I have a vested interest in them winning. Um, Anthropic might win, OpenAI might win. I think it's less likely that Microsoft will win or that Facebook will win. >> Well, we know it won't be Facebook. Why do you know that? >> I mean, let's look at who's running Facebook. Okay, come on. >> No, it's not who's running it. it who has the resources to get the right people to do the work. >> All right, Jeffrey, the follow up on that is whoever crosses the line first, what is their prize? What will be the reward for them getting there before? >> Wait, back up for a sec. Tell me about the value of the stock market in the last year. Okay. And my belief is just from reading it in the media that 80% of the increase of the value in the stock market, the US stock market can be attributed to the increase in value of the big AI companies. >> True. >> 80% of the growth. >> Yes. >> Anyone thinking bubble? And that's kind of what they're calling it, the AI bubble. >> Okay. >> The issue is this. There's two senses of bubble. One sense of bubble is it turns out AI doesn't really work as well as people thought it might. >> Right? >> It doesn't actually develop the ability to replace all human intellectual labor which is what most people developing it believe is going to happen in the end. >> That was the fear factor for sure. >> Yeah. >> The other sense of bubble is the companies can't get their money back from the investments. Now that seems to be more likely kind of bubble >> because as far as I understand it, the companies are all assuming if we can get there first, we can sell people AI that will replace a lot of jobs. And of course, people will pay a lot of money for that. So, we'll get lots of money. But they haven't thought about the social consequences. If they really do replace lots of jobs, the social consequences will be terrible. >> Correct. >> Totally. However, it'll be it'll be >> they replace the jobs and now you still want to sell your product and no one has income to buy the product. >> Yeah. It's it's a self-limiting path. >> That's the Keynesian view of it. And then the additional view is that there'll be high unemployment levels which will lead to a lot of social unrest. So the uh yeah the secondary uh view of that is you just have two tiers of existence for our societies and the first tier is all the people who are benefiting from AI and the second tier are the you know the the feudal peasants that are now forced to live their lives because of AI. >> Let me ask you a non-AI question because just you're a deep thinker in this space. That's what everybody said in the dawn of automation. Everyone will be unemployed. there'll be no jobs left and society will go to ruin. Yet society expanded with other needs and other things people that's why 90% of us are no longer farmers. Okay, we we we've have machines to do that and we invent other things like vacation resource >> but that decades this is going to take a fraction. >> Is that so Jeffrey is the problem here the rapidity with which we may create an unemployment an unemployed class where the society cannot recover from the rate at which people are losing their jobs. That certainly is one big aspect of the problem. But there's another aspect which is if you use a tractor to replace physical labor, you need far fewer people now. Other people can go off and do intellectual things. But if you replace human intelligence, where are they going to go? Where are people who work in a call center going to go when an AI can do their job cheaper and better? >> Right. Yeah. This is >> Oh, so there's not another thing. there's not another thing. >> They open another thing and then AI will do that. >> Right? >> Whatever thing you open, AI can do. >> You can look at human history in an interesting way as getting rid of limitations. >> So a long time ago, we had the limitation you had to worry about where your next meal was coming from, >> right? >> Agriculture got rid of that. It introduced a lot of other problems, but it got rid of that particular worry. Then we had the limitation you couldn't travel very far. Well, the bicycle helped a lot with that and cars and airplanes. We got over that kind of limitation. For a long time, we had the limitation. We were the ones who had to do the thinking. We're just about to get over that limitation. And it's not clear what happens once you got over all the limitations. People like Sam Elman think it'll be wonderful, >> right? So, we we'll become AI's pet. >> Well, no. A lot of people believe that this is the um and this this movement started years ago for universal global income. >> Okay. So would you say Jeffrey that the the universal basic income the stock value the figurative stock value in that idea is growing as AI gains power. >> It's becoming to seem more essential but it has lots of problems. So one problem is many people get their sense of selfworth from the job they do and it won't deal with the dignity issue. Another problem is the tax base. If you replace workers with AIs, the government loses its tax base. It has to somehow be able to tax the AIs. But the big companies aren't going to like that. >> I think we should let AI figure out this problem. >> That's right. So Jeffrey the many people uh especially sci-fi writers distinguish between the power and intellect of machines fine and the crossover when they become conscious and that's was a big moment in the Terminator series >> that was the singularity in the terminator >> when Skynet Skynet >> had enough neural connections or whatever kind of connections made it so that it achieved consciousness. So there seems to be and if you come to this as a as a cognitive psychologist, I'm curious how you think about this. Are we allowed to presume that given sufficient complexity in any neural net be it real or imag or or artificial something such as consciousness emerges. >> So the problem here is not really a scientific problem. It's that most people in our culture have a theory of how the mind works and they have a view of consciousness as some kind of essence that emerges. I think consciousness is like flegiston maybe. Um it's an essence that's designed to explain things and once we understand those things we won't be trying to use that essence to explain them. I want to try and convince you that a multimodal chatbot already has subjective experience. So people use the word sentience or consciousness or subjective experience. Let's focus on subjective experience for now. Most people in our culture think that the way the mind works is it's a kind of internal theater. And when you're doing perception, the world shows up in this internal theater and only you can see what's there. So if I say to you, if I drink a lot and I say to you, I have the subjective experience of little pink elephants floating in front of me. Most people interpret that as there's this inner theater, my mind and I can see what's in it and what's in it is little pink elephants and they're not made of real pink and real elephants. So they must be made of something else. So philosophers invent qualia which is kind of the flegiston of cognitive science. They say they must be made of qualia. Let me give you a completely different view that is Daniel Dennett's view who was a great philosopher of cognitive science which is >> late great philosopher. Yeah, >> the late great that view of the mind is just utterly wrong. So I'm now going to say the same thing as when I told you I had the subjective experience of Olympic elephants without using the word subjective experience and without appealing to Qualia. I start off by saying I believe my perceptual systems lying to me. That's the subjective bit of it. But if my perceptual system wasn't lying to me, there would be little pink elephants out there in the world floating in front of me. So what's funny about these little pink elephants is not that they're made of qualia and they're in an inner theta. It's that they're hypothetical. They're a technique for me telling you how my perceptual systems lying by telling you what would have to be there for my perceptual system to be telling the truth. And now I'm going to do it with a chatbot. I take a multimodal chatbot. I train it up. It's got a camera. It's got a robot arm. It can talk. I put an object in front of it and I say, "Point at the object and it points at the object." Then I mess up its perceptual system. I put a prism in front of the camera. And now I put an object in front of it and say, "Point at the object." And it points off to one side. And I say to it, "No, that's not where the object is. It's actually straight in front of you." But I put a prism in front of your lens. And the chatbot says, "Oh, I see. The prism bent the light rays, so the object is actually straight in front of me." But I had the subjective experience that it was off to one side. Now, if the chatbot said that, it would be using words subjective experience exactly the way we use them. And so that chatbot would have just had a subjective experience. >> Now, what if you um first went out drinking with the chatbot and you had a very significant amount of Johnny Walker Blue? >> That's extremely improbable. I would have Leafrog. >> Oh. Oh. >> Oh, you're I see you're an eye man. You like the piness of the leaf. Okay, good man. >> Oh, so if I understand what you just shared with us in these two examples, >> you actually pulled a consciousness touring test on us. You said a human would do this and now your chatbot does it and it's fundamentally the same. So if you want to say we're conscious for exhibiting that behavior, you're going to have to say the chatbot's conscious and inventing whatever mysterious fluid is making that happen. But it could be that we are the whole concept of consciousness is a distraction from just the actions that people take in the face of stimulus. >> Okay. So notice that the chatbot doesn't have any mysterious essence or fluid called consciousness, but it has a subjective experience just like we do. So I think this whole idea of consciousness is some magic essence that you suddenly get indicted with if you're complicated enough is just nonsense. >> Yeah, there you go. >> I agree. I've always felt that consciousness was something people are trying to explain without knowing if it really exists >> in in any kind of tangible way, >> which is why it's always difficult to describe because you don't know what it is >> for example. Yes. Yes. But I think there is awareness. And if you look at what scientists say when they're not thinking philosophically, there's a lovely paper where the chatbot says, "Now, let's be honest with each other. Are you actually testing me?" And the scientists say, "The chatbot was aware it was being tested." So, they're attributing awareness to a chatbot. And in everyday conversation, you call that consciousness. It's only when you start thinking philosophically and thinking that it's some funny mysterious essence that you get all confused. >> Well, there is >> I have to say that this has been a fascinating conversation that will cause me not to sleep for a month. >> Um, yeah, >> you get plenty of work done. >> So, Jeffrey, take us out on a positive note, please. So, we still have time to figure out if there's a way we can coexist happily with AI and we should be putting a lot of research effort into that because if we can coexist happily with it and we can solve all the social problems that will arise when it makes all our jobs much easier then it can be a wonderful thing for people. >> Agreed. Okay. So, so there is hope. >> Yes. And one last thing because you hinted at it, this point of singularity where AI trains on itself so that it exponentially gets smarter like by the minute. That's been called a singularity by many people. Of course, Ray Kershw among them who's been a guest on a previous episode of Stars. >> Yeah. A couple of times. Yeah. So, what is your sense of this singularity? Is it real the way others say? Is it imminent the way others say? I don't know the answer to either of those questions. My suspicion is AI will get better at us in the end at everything, better than us at everything, but it'll be sort of one thing at a time. It's currently much better than us at chess and go. It's much better than us at knowing a lot of things. Not quite as good as us at reasoning. I think rather than sort of massively overtaking us in everything all at once, it'll be done one area at a time. And my sort of way out of that is, you know, I get to walk a beach and look at pebbles and seashells. AI doesn't. >> Yeah. It can create its own beach. >> No. Would it only know about the new mollisk that I discovered if I write it up and put it online? >> Mhm. >> So, the human can continue to explore the universe in ways that AI doesn't have access to. >> There's one word missing from your entire assessment. >> What's that? >> Yet. Yeah, I just think of my, you know, will AI come up with a new theory of the universe that requires human insights that it doesn't have because I'm thinking the way no one has thought before. >> I think it will. >> That's not the answer I wanted from you. >> Yeah, I was. >> But that's the answer you got. >> Let me give you an example. AI is very good at analogies already. So when chat GPD4 was not allowed to look on the web when all its knowledge was in its weights, I asked it why is a compost heap like an atom bomb and it knew it said the energy scales are very different and the time scales are very different. But it then went on to talk about how when a compost heap gets hotter it generates heat faster and when an atom bomb generates more neutrons it generates neutrons faster. Um, so it understood the commonality and it had to understand that to pack all that knowledge into so few connections, only a trillion or so. That's a source of much creativity >> and it's not just by finding words that were juxtaposed with other words. >> No, it understood what a chain reaction was. >> Yeah. >> Well, all right. That's the end of us. >> Yeah. We're done >> on Earth. We're done. >> We're finished. >> This is the last episode. We >> stick in us. We're done. Gentlemen, it's been a pleasure. >> Well, Jeffrey Hinton, it's been a delight to have you on. >> We know you're you're tugged in many directions, especially after your recent Nobel Prize, and we're delighted you gave us a piece of your surely overscheduled and busy life. >> Thank you for inviting me. >> Well, guys, that was something. >> Did you sit comfortably through all of that? >> I was I I I squirmed. I squirmed. >> I knew you'd panic. Well, no. I have to tell you that um certain parts of the um conversation gave me the anxiety of, you know, sitting in a theater theater with diarrhea. >> Thanks for that explicit. >> Thanks for sharing. That That's the nicest thing anybody's ever said about me. >> On that note, this has been Star Talk special edition. Chuck, always good to have you. Gary, love having you right at my side. Neil deGrasse Tyson bidding you as always to keep looking up however much harder that will become.

