## The End of GPU Scaling? Compute & The Agent Era — Tim Dettmers (Ai2) & Dan Fu (Together AI)

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XCCkgRzth6Q

We have maxed out the features. We have maxed out the hardware. That's what we get. >> By almost any definition anyone could have written down, let's say 5 years ago or 10 years ago, we basically have the vision of AGI that that we had back then. >> Everything that grows exponential will level off because if you need resources, the resources will be exhausted. >> You can see up to two orders of magnitude more compute available, 100x more compute. >> If you don't know how to use agents well, you will be left behind. >> How far can you push it? I think it's never been a more exciting time to work in AI. Hi, I'm Matt Turk. Welcome to the Matt podcast. Today we have a special reality check on AGI with two guests who are very close to the computational reality of AI. Tim Demmer of AI2 and Danfu of Together AI. In this episode, the team argues that we are hitting diminishing returns and running into hard physical constraints while Dan argues that we are still leaving huge performance on the table and that today's models are lagging indicators of hardware progress. Then we shift into a fun practical discussion on how to use agents and what to expect from AI in 2026. Please enjoy this fun conversation with Tim and Dan. >> Tim and Dan, welcome. >> Thanks for having us. >> So Tim, a few weeks ago you wrote a great provocative blog post entitled Why AGI will not happen. And then Dan, a few days later you replied with your own blog post equally fascinating entitled Yes, AGI will happen. I'd love to uh go into your backgrounds. You both have the very interesting characteristic of being having a foot in industry and a foot in academia. So uh Timmy if you want to start with yours. >> I'm assistant professor at Carnegie Man University machine learning and copa science department and also research scientists at the Ellen Institute for AI. My past research has been mostly on efficient deep learning quantization. Uh that means model compression. take large models, compress them down from like 16 bit to something like 4bit. Key research has been there. Um, for example, it's a very efficient fine tuning. We compress to 4bit, use adapters on the model and then use up to 16 times uh less memory than if you have dense both handling and now I'm working on coding agents that we have a very exciting release in about two weeks. um state-of-the-art agents. You can quickly specialize to private data, get like strong performance on any code base that you like. Um and yeah, that's very exciting. >> Dan, >> hey. Um so I'm an assistant professor at UC San Diego. Uh and also my total VP of kernels at together AI. So um in in industry, I focus a lot on um basically making models go fast. So GPU kernels are the things that that actually translate the models to um to to how they run on on the GPU. You can think of them as as basically specialized GPU programs. A lot of my research uh in my PhD in my lab uh focused on that. So I I developed things like flash attention which was a efficient kernel for the one of the core operations of of a lot of the uh language models that that we use today. I also did research on sort of alternative architectures to transformers, things like state space models and and things like that. And together I'm really focused on how do you make the best language models that we have today. How do we make them go faster? Uh I think you know as of uh as of this morning's recording, we actually just released a blog post with Cursor about how we accelerated a bunch of their uh models and and helped them launch composer 2.0 um on Nvidia's Blackwell GPU. So that that's a a bit of a flavor of what I do. So let's get into this AGI discussion and then in the second part of this conversation we'll talk about agents and coding agents and your thoughts there because I want to make sure we cover that AGI uh obviously it's a term that uh everybody uses and I think we can all agree that nobody really knows what that means but for for purposes of this discussion uh what is a uh useful definition of AGI from your perspective? >> Sure. Yeah. I think so. One one of the things that that we kind of discussed back and forth in in this set of blog posts is sort of what AGI means. For me, I think one of the things that I've been thinking about recently is that if you took where we are today with the models that we have today with the language models and I think you know we'll probably talk about this a bit more with the later with the agents by almost any definition anyone could have written down let's say 5 years ago or 10 years ago. Certainly when you know Tim you and I started our PhDs we basically have the vision of AGI that that we had back then. We have things that can write code. They can write you know human text even though you know maybe the they they use too many m dashes or or something like that but they can uh do do these really really amazing things. I think one of the things that I think about is at what level does this kind of become a new industrial revolution where you can where this technology is really going to change a lot of what the way that we do things today the the and have a huge you know really really great economic impact in terms of software engineering I feel like we're already there or almost there like uh there are there are things that may be super specialized like I don't know if they're going to be able to write like the best forran and cobalt code in the world um but for web development a lot of even a lot of low-level systems engineering, they're they're already really great. One of the reasons that that that I wrote my blog post was um if you kind of think about where we are today, you know, we maybe already have AGI or like some some form of AGI. And if not, then certainly the next generation of models, the models that today are training already. Um if they're at all better than what we have today, then we're we're we we've already hit something that's that's really amazing and and and and pretty wild. when I wrote my blog post actually I um I noticed like oh I I forgot to put the definition of AGI my blog post even though my blog post is very much about AGI and and I think that sometimes sort of reflects how we think about AGI we don't think carefully about the definition I mean there are sort of um and I I thought about it before and I think there sort of uh different kind of definitions that have sort of advantages disadvantages I wouldn't say I mean as you said before there's not one definition that people agree on just to mention sort of a couple um and I think one that's sort of quite widespread is to see AGI as sort of cognitive abilities, cognitive tasks. What can you do cognitive? I mean and software engineering very cognitive writing very cognitive moving a robot in in space um that's more genetic um sort of you can you could also say like hey you also need to think about how you move that's also part of cognition but I think most people would separate that and um say everything digital is kind of cognitive and if you have physical that goes beyond that what I think makes sense is sort of this economic angle can we at another ind industrial revolution. What it means is is AI useful and it's so broad and useful that you want to use it everywhere kind of um it accelerates all kinds of things um similar to where computers were introduced productivity increase not initially a productivity actually went down and you need your diffusion in the economy to pick it up again. we might see something like that with AGI more broadly in task for like software engineering scale it's going up uh pretty significantly but yeah I think that is useful >> let's jump into the the heart of the argument Tim I was amused by what you said about um where where all those ideas of a super intelligence uh come from if you want to uh talk to that >> yeah and to sort of lay out sort of the entire narrative there are certain thoughts about AGI that is sort of very much rooted in a certain kind of thinking. Uh it comes from effective altruism communities of the rationality communities. I was part of this communities like long time ago that is now 15 years ago. If you look on Twitter there's always like oh we get AGI in 2 years and then one year later oh we get AGI in two years and one year later we get AGI in two years. I feel like it's a little bit of lazy thinking, a little bit of being in a bubble and not being exposed to different ideas. And that was one of the main motivations for me writing the blog post because I feel like there are some things some ideas that if you think about them um they might provide a counterpoint to a lot of the thinking that's out there. >> Yeah. And you and your c your core thinking is that um there is a tension between those ideas and the computational reality. Is that is that a fair way to put it? Yeah, there's some there's a physical component and then there's an idea component, but there similar structure and this structure is basically diminishing returns. Everything that grows exponential will level off because if you need resources, the resources will be exhausted. Resources can mean different things and if you look at the physical aspect um it gets just more and more difficult to advance technology. That is the case almost with any field of uh research or development. um things get more more easily. You need more resources to make further progress and the pro progress sort of and goes uh lower and lower and so if you look at the physical reality of computational devices and then also computation itself has particular structure and so basically computation useful computation is two things. The first is you need to gather data from one location and aggregate it in a certain location where you then put this new information together to compute a transformation of that information. You basically want to combine um sort of known things and compute some new sort of um things that you didn't know before. Useful information. useful information can and needs to be transformed from information that you already know. If you move a lot of information around but you don't transform it, you can't make new information. If you do a lot of computation on the information that you already have, you miss out on the long distance insight, the indirect insights. I think a lot of this actually maps to the neural network architectures that we have. Um the beginnings we had convolutional networks they are very effective and what they doing they don't move much memory they do a lot of computation and that means your device needs a lot of flops and memory bandwidth is not that important once you go to very dense computation very large matrices then it goes in the direction um of the current neural networks but there you have still sort of this component of your recurrent um basically paying attention to previous states. And but because it's recurrence, the memory reuse of that computation is minimal. And with um transformers, you basically then had these large matrices that compute basically that transform the incoming information from the previous layer. And then you had a tension that now computes the information across time or space. And um I would argue these are the most two fundamental ways of computing information. You want relate information to itself or transformation of that uh information. But then you also want to basically relate information to um distantly related of information. So you want long-term relationships and you want a transformation based on what you already know. >> And you say this is slowing down, right? like in your um blog post you have a pretty striking sentence where you say uh GPUs will no longer improve meaning fully. We have essentially seen the last generation of significant GPU improvements. >> Yeah. So this has two components and so one is also sort of a very fundamental thing and it's physical in the sense that um I mentioned these two um components uh memory movement and computation and so computation can only be useful if you move memory to this sort of local neighborhood where you do this computation. Now this is a geometric problem. You need to have a large store of information and then use this large store to move information closer to where you do want to do the computation. And we have figured out how to physically do is optimal. We have like a large slow memory that's DRAM. Then we move it to a cache. If you look at the geometry, that's how you do it fast. If you have a certain size of computation, this is optimal. If you have a different size of computation matrix multiplication, then you want to use not a CPU but more like a GPU which has higher latency but more throughput. You can move more data but more slowly. And um yeah, if you look at all of that, you can push around a little bit how you structure everything like the caches and uh how large they are and how much cores are they shared. But in the end uh the fundamental problem uh remains the same. You have a geometric problem. You can only fill the space in a certain way and that means you always have certain access pattern with certain um latencies and the biggest latency is a big block of uh DRAM that is the major bottleneck. This is also called the uh fonoman uh battle neck bottleneck based on computers almost all computers that we have and this is a bottleneck of um moving a program to where you execute the program and for neuronet networks that's basically move the weights in the inputs to uh the execution where you execute the program that would be the tensor course. there are not many ways how you can go around this bottleneck. Um the only way is to store the memory locally and do the local computation there. And there are some processes that do something like that. For example, this reburse processor. So they don't have this forment bottleneck in a major way on the ship, but then they need to also pipe data into that ship. And so the forment bottleneck moves basically away from the ship to your storage or 2J network. And so you just move it away but still the same bottleneck. You need to load the program which might side on the disk or memory through the network to the ship and same physical problem. You just move a couple of variables around. That is sort of one part of the problem. We don't have architectures that can solve this problem. That's sort of the second part where um my argument kicks in and that is you need new technology to overcome bottlenecks. But once you have leveraged that technology, you need new technology to get over that. If you look at what we can do is we move from DAM to uh HPM. So that's DM that's stacked. That's much faster, but you can only stack it that high because it's very difficult to manufacture and test in correctness. um the yields is very low and we run actually in 2026 there's not enough HDM you can't build the nice processes and more because you run out and it's just too difficult to manufacture them and with that um we have all these innovations one of those tensor core big step up then have 8 bit precision another step up then we have four bit precision uh with particular blockwide quantization particular data types from my research another research we know that's those two information theoretically opt able in a practical sense. If you train on enough data, four bit precision is not up enough. You need actually 8 bit precision. So you can't go further. The hardware is maxed out. We have no new technology. We can make it easier to manufacture and a little bit cheaper but not faster. And we have maxed out on the additional features. Sparity could be something people tried it for 50 years. I tried it present well. And so that might be the last thing but 4bit precision is the end of quantization. So, um, that's the end of it. Like, we have maxed out the features, we have maxed out the hardware, that's what we get. >> Okay. Fascinating. All right, Dan, what is your perspective on all of this? >> I really appreciated Tim's post because I think one one thing that that I really appreciated is that there's some some AJI talk that if you just kind of like trace the exponential, at some point you get, you know, the the thing that will eat up the the universe or or whatever. Um, which I I always found it a little bit odd to to think that way. I I appreciate the the thing in terms of the actual physical constraints because uh you know like Tim said these are physical systems with physical inputs um and uh and actually doing physical computation. I think my perspective was that if you look at where the systems are today and you look at the the models that we've trained uh we are just so far from being from even using the last generation of hardware as as efficiently as as possible. So not to mention all the new hardware that that's being built out. So I think on the technical side I'd say there there are two major points I I wanted to make in my post which was one if you look at the models that are kind of the the really great ones um that uh that that we know today and I in my blog post I mostly talked about open source models because they talk a little bit more about how they train the resources behind it. um we don't have public figures behind you know how much open AI and enthropic are using um but if you look at the deepseek model for instance this is one of the best open source models we have out there today it was trained at the end of 2024 on last generation kind of nerfed GPUs H800's instead of H100's the 800 is nerfed I by all sorts of ways from from Nvidia um to to get around the the export restrictions at the time um and they were trained with let's call it like about 2,000 H800s uh according to the report for I I think about a month and when you compute how much how long that took when you see how much compute was actually available on the chip you get something like a 20% um uh effective chip utilization or something like that the the number that the the term of art is called MFU model flop utilization um but basically that's a a 20% um utilization number um meanwhile you know in I think in the early earlier in the 2020s we were seeing lots of training runs on on older hardware different model architectures that were easily achieving 50 60% MFU. So if you just take that number and then say hey maybe there's a way to to to to get it out there since then um you know my good friend Tri's released a whole new set of kernels on how to train the these models better and you say okay there's a 3x there just just from from from that one piece. Um then the other thing to realize is that so that is a model that is being used today in early 2026 as the base for some of the best um open- source or or open source adjacent models out there. It would have started training the base model at least a year and a half ago. So let's call it mid 2024. Since then we started building out completely new clusters with the current generation of hardware. So in in on Nvidia these are the blackwells. Um, we've started, you know, there there companies like Poolside that are building out tens of thousands of of B200, GB200 chips. You know, there's there's uh other folks like Reflection who are b who are building out tens of thousands of of B200 chips. So this is comparing we have a new set a new generation of hardware where even if you take the exact same precision as you had before exact same everything uh 2 to 3x faster compute 10x larger clusters um plus you know maybe 3x lurking in terms of just pure optimization that's 3 * 3 times maybe another 10 that's like what another 90x of compute available um and that's not even looking at future buildouts that is literally clusters that you can point to today um that that people have started training on that that you might hope that at the end of that you'll you'll get much better models. The point I really wanted to make was if you just look at it from those basic inputs, you can look around, you can squint a little bit, you can see up to two orders of magnitude more compute available um compared to the models that we are indexing on today. Now we can argue about you know is there are there going to be diminishing diminishing returns in ter in terms of scaling up um are there going to be do we expect the scaling curves to hold and and all that um but you you can just look around and see it and that's that's you know 100x more compute. So I think from the physical just a pure compute perspective there's a lot more available a lot more um that that we're not doing. Uh this is not even to mention a bunch of the the great points that you mentioned Tim. So, these are all 8bit training runs. We've just started writing the papers about how to do a 4-bit training run properly. Um, there's new things like the uh on the GB200, you have 72 of these really connected really really quickly. I don't think we've even seen the first pre-trained model come out of that yet. GPT 5.2 2 I think was the first time that that you saw in one of OpenAI's reports, hey, this was trained on H100, H200, and GP200, which to me suggests that was actually pre-trained on one of the really old clusters, maybe some fine-tuning was done um on on the new GP200s. >> You make the point that not not only is the hardware underutilized, but you also say that uh models themselves are a lagging indicator. >> Yeah. So the models that we see today that we can play with today have been pre-trained on clusters that were built out uh a year or two ago. Um because you know you you need enough time to get the cluster running. You need enough time to do the large pre-training run and then you need enough time to really post-train it, fine-tune it, do all the LHF and and all that stuff. Um so the the models that we have a snapshot today that at the beginning of a conversation it's like h maybe it is AGI maybe it isn't are already trained on uh clusters that are a year and a half old we've built out much larger clusters since then we can expect you know you you can expect that they're going to use them for for pre-training the models that we see today that we index on quality today are actually trained on pretty old hardware um and we've got new generations of hardware more software uh choices we can make not to mention architectural choices like so so Tim you were mentioning that this thing about you need to move data and then compute on data um we've actually seen the transformer change in architecture um for over the last a little bit slowly for like you know for for researcher a little bit slowly for my taste but you've seen the fundamental way we do the computation change even if you find another 1.5x or 2x there now you're talking you know 100 150x more compute like um so there there there's a lot more compute out there um to to train better higher quality models. >> If I understand this whole discussion correctly, all of this is about pre-training, right? And whether we can train bigger model with uh you know more data and more compute. But in conversations on this pod, a lot of the conversation have been about the importance of post-raining and the you know building AI systems with pre-training plus RL. Where does that fit? That's a great question and and I think another piece that that we we didn't you know I don't think either of our blogs particularly hit on. One way I like to think about it is that pre-training is like the general strength training that you do in the gym. You go lift heavy weights, you improve your strength, improve your your your general ability and then post-training is like the specific drills that you run to um to to get a good at at a particular task. So historically the vast amount of compute has gone to pre-training. suggest building models that are more generally capable of doing many things have a lot of knowledge get to a point where maybe they they have more knowledge than than your average person you know I I certainly don't know as much as as chat GBT for for instance and then the post training is both how do you make it helpful so uh you know chat GBT you ask it to do something and then it actually listens to you um and and tries to tries its best to do it but I think the other thing that that we've started to see increasingly in post training is that you can start to postrain specific speific skills. So, uh the model that's really good at helping you code uses a lot of the knowledge that you got from pre-training but is actually adapted to be particularly good for coding or um or the or the the model that's really good for legal work, for instance, has a lot of the the pre-training backbone, but then the post- training is really what gets it to that to that place where it's really useful. From a pure computational perspective, pre-training is usually much more compute expensive than post- training. um post-training the work that you have to do I think um I I'm not a post- trainining expert but the work ends up looking a lot more like how do you build a useful product how do you get user feedback how do you do things like that even then there's there there's a world where uh you know maybe the the next generation of models is the the next generation of pre-trained models is is a strong enough base that if you go tackle each vertical of the economy that you care about you could actually post- train it to um to something quite useful Um, so I think that that that's a whole other computational aspect of it. So maybe we don't even need that 100x more compute that that may that that may be out there. Maybe it's more a a more traditional work of you know let's understand this problem deeply to understand how to train in almost the human sense like how how would you take an intern and and train this intern to to do this specific task? How do you get this very powerful pre-trained model to do something really useful? Um in in this post- training sense >> is this concept of usefulness that you both mention where both of your point of views maybe converge some ways AGI is something but what ultimately matters is is where you land in terms like usefulness in the industry and therefore even though you one may not be able to reach that kind of ethereal definition of AGI that nobody really understands uh due to diminishing returns in some ways doesn't matter because we still have like so much juice to squeeze that uh we have enough to go until we get to a place where this is truly useful not just for coding but for the rest of the economy. >> Yeah. The main conclusion of sort of my blog post was exactly that like we shouldn't pay too much attention to AGI but more about thinking about how can we make it most useful that might go beyond of how useful is a model. I mean Dan mention mentioned like post training as a product. An important part we saw with computers is diffusion in the economy that requires a very different mindset. US mindset is build the best model and then everybody will use it but it can help to really figure out how can you benefit the most people in the most pragmatic way and I think that's sort of more the Chinese mindset and so that that sort of mindset so if I think of usefulness one is model the other is sort of the mindset but I would agree I think I think that both Dan and I I think most people would agree that if you have an AI that does very impressive things like math olympiate things and that sort of thing but it can't do anything useful is at AGI um mean um and so models are already useful so that that scenario will not happen but I think what we really want is very very useful models and I think we have that and I think we can prove that but um I don't think we get to AGI by SER definitions but we will see significant impact >> yeah I think I I would just add to that that um Tim you had this point about you know how much of the economy is is physical how much of it is um um knowledge work and I think that the US China you know contrast is is really interesting there and you know there's been these analyses this book by Dan Wong going around about um the manufacturing economy the engineering economy versus the more lawyerly economy um and I think there's certainly a lot of great knowledge work to to be done in the US um I think there there's also if you look at what the actual sectors of the economy are. So a large portion of it is healthcare, a large portion of it is education. Um tech is certainly a also a large portion that's kind of leading the stock market and and driving the stock market. We have a there there's a lot of great people who are trying to use the new models to try to do things like develop new drugs or or understand how to how to make a real impact in in healthcare or if we can get robotics off the ground and do things like start taking um helping with some of the the the you know the the physical labor um maybe not necessarily building houses but the the day-to-day household labor um that that could be large untapped portions of the economy. Those pieces are are are really great. can you can almost start to see the first pieces towards it. Uh the self-driving analogy is really interesting to me because early on I'll say early on in my PhD I was quite skeptical about uh self-driving. So let's call this 2018 2019 it felt like self-driving was always a year away or two years away or if you ask the the experts they say oh five years away. Um and then last year I rode in a Whimo and today I can I can I I just actually got got access to Whimo on the highway. So now conceivably I could, you know, potentially sell my car and I live in in the Bay Area in California. Um I won't because I personally like driving. Um but there's there's a lot of the progress is funny in this way where it's kind of it's not there. It's not there. It's not there. And then one day something a switch flips and then you're suddenly like, oh, not only is this thing pretty good, it's actually a lot better than the service that I'd get in an Uber or a taxi or something like that. That's a really exciting thing if we see that happen. if that we see that flips that switch flip for like you know household cleaning or or putting away the dishes or things like that I think it would it would it would really be really exciting it would change a lot of folks perspectives I'm not a roboticist myself but I'm really watching that space with a lot of excitement >> Dan as a quick tangent do you think we evolving towards a multi-h hardware multi-chip kind of world based on what you see you know obviously there's been gro and Nvidia there's cerebras there's like a bunch of sort of special AS6 companies coming up from from your kind of like lowlevel in the stack vantage point. What do you see? >> Yeah, that that's a great question. So, it's something that I spend quite a bit of time thinking about um more so I'd say on the lab side than than necessarily um in on on the industry side. Um although of course we're we're paying close attention kind of on both sides. I think it's it's at a really exciting time where um the Nvidia chips are really strong, really reliable. Uh there's a lot of software support around them that that that has built around we're starting to see the same things happen for example on AMD chips um with with some some of the research there. So on the lab side, we put out a recently a library called Hipkittens led by my great friend Simron Aurora. Um, and she was really looking at, okay, how can we take what are the right software abstractions to to program on these AMD GPUs? And turns out they're not exactly the same as the Nvidia GPUs. So even even two GPUs that have relatively similar specs certainly compared to Grock or Cerebras or Sabanova or one of these other chips um even though they're relatively similar they they actually have pretty different software abstractions you need to use. Um and I think more people are getting excited by that and and investing time and and energy into that. Um we saw the Grock acquisition from Nvidia. A lot of people are excited about TPUs today. I think uh Cerebras and OpenAI just just announced um their partnership. Um so I think certainly it's going to be a wave of things coming forward that that you're going to see um a lot more. I'm sure Nvidia will still do great and still grow beyond their $5 trillion company or whatever it is at the time of recording. But I think you're you're going to see a lot more diversity um especially around I think inference of the model. So training and inference are actually quite different computations and as a result you might actually want quite different chips to do it. Um on the inference side you might want for example your models to live locally on your phone on your laptop. You know my phone my my iPhone which is a few years old at this point is already more powerful than some of the GPUs that that I had when when I was starting my PhD. That growth of of that hardware power is is really exciting to see. And Dan, you mentioned a a second ago in reference to uh self-driving cars, that moment where where things flipped, switches is turned on. Has that happened with agents already? You talked about software singularity. Are we are we at that moment for agents? >> Yeah, I think that so personally in in my life, I'd say that moment was last Juneish. So June 2025 was the moment that that it really flipped for me. to give some context here. So what I do in my day job at Together AI is we write a lot of these GPU kernels. I I don't know how popular, but the in the in the general ML zeitgeist GPU kernels are thought of as kind of like the final boss of the thing that you learn how to program. They're very hard. They're very highly parallel. Uh you don't write them like you have to write in C++ which is this old language that the old systems people used, you know, decades ago or whatever. They're not in Python, etc. When you're trying to hire for people who can write kernels, it's very hard. It's a very challenging skill set. It's certainly, you know, the the the the the tip of the spear in terms of um the their programming strength. And last June, we had this really interesting realization where we realized that cloud cloud code, cursor agent, these agentic coding assistants were actually very good at writing these kernels. So, um, there was one week where I think I wrote like three or four different features that usually would have taken me a week each and I wrote all of those in in a single day. Um, and I was like, "Oh my god, this thing is making me five times more productive as a kernel expert. Um, I got my team on it. Now my team has all these really complex systems that they've built where they can write a whole feature that I think would have taken um months of a of a whole team's time before. Um, and this is kind of the the that that final boss of of programming challenge that that was really that was really challenging. So from from our perspective for coding for this really technically challenging GPU um kernel programming, it kind of crossed that that kind of crossed the Rubicon for us already. And I think you know uh I gave this talk a few months ago um at Slush about what we're calling the software singularity where we realized hey in terms of software engineering even for these really niche skills um it's it's certainly better than the average programmer. It's at a place where it can accelerate the really expert programmer. So um it's right now as of you know today's recording is at a place where if I just let it on its own it might not generate the right thing for you. But if you give an expert programmer this set of tools, they can go 10 10 times faster than than they were able to go before. Um, and I think that that that's a really exciting uh place to be. >> And on that topic of agents, Tim, you just wrote another great blog post called uh use agents or be left behind. And part of what you talk about is coding agents versus agents for the rest of tasks. Where are we in that arc where um agents are are transitioning from being excellent at code to useful for the rest of our lives? >> That blog post was also as as a reaction to what I see is there are a lot of productivity gains if you use coding agents for all kinds of tasks and as a professor you don't code that much. You can actually code more easily which probably other professors previously would not do. so easy now. But yeah, also for non-coding tasks, it's super useful. And when I look at um the productivity gains that I have, some of it is smaller like two or three. Sometimes it's like 10 times faster. I do task 10 times faster. The quality is not degraded. Sometimes the quality is um higher. Um an agent might not be as good as I am, but the agent doesn't get tired. Agent doesn't uh make sort of bad mistakes or Yeah. and you cognitively struggle like with like complicated information that you put together similar to Buddha kernels what what um Dan mentioned all of that is working and um I mean Matt as you put it is coding agents and agents for other stuff but how I would see it is it's just coding agents coding agents are general agents uh coding agents can write programs that solve other problems and code is so general if there's a digital problem you could solve it with code and coding agents make the things so easy that um now you can solve a variety of problems in a way that you couldn't solve before and this angle makes you productive. I would say this is the main the main thing that has been changing. Coding agents allow you to check a problem in a way that you could think before and is at a pace that you couldn't think before. You can paralyze a lot of different tasks. The agent doesn't get tired. Um you just keep going. the works much easier. One bit I love in your post is that you're careful to separate hype from reality at the beginning but then quickly you land from your experience of experimenting uh with agents uh for the live stream in particular you land at the conclusion that more than 90% of code and text should be written by agents you need to do so or you will be left behind >> and I think for for many people that are engineers that's already true and there is sort of this thinking oh if you produce text or code and everything sent by Asians must be low quality much must be bad but um the key thing is you inspect the code you inspect the text you might might make some slide edits the 10% that you do might make a big big difference through this um basically um sort of editing just reviewing of output you kind of make it your own um AI generated things um are not less personal than things you've written on know I see that if if I write a grant proposal with the help of an agent it's sort of alive it I can feel like it's exciting like if person reading it said like yeah this is good research I want to fund this I think that's just the reality like if you just generate things and don't look at it and just say like yep that's good that will not help you but um you can quickly review content you can skin it you can look at like ah this doesn't look right or I want it different and edit it and you're good to go that will be the reality and the skills that you need to um work in that way. They're not fully developed for most people. They're also not fully developed for me. It's still sort of a face of experimentation. Models move, frameworks move. And so you need to adapt, you need to learn, there's lots to learn, but if you do it, payoffs are huge. And I think there was a thinking that software engineers will no longer exist. But I think people no longer believe that. It's like subconscious are so productive. That is exactly what you need to learn. If you use agents well, you can do so many things and I think that's the core thing. If you don't know how to use agents well, you will be left behind. That will become a critical skill. >> Practically, how do I do that? If I'm uh not a coder and I think about automating some parts of of my job, what are some of your recommendations on how to approach that problem? Yeah, I mean the best thing is just sort of being sort of very pragmatic. Just think about things and trying to code them. particular if you're not a coder that's very difficult and there's sort of this barrier where say like I haven't coded before like I don't know this and but if you interact with agents um they can just build stuff and with minimal learning I mean they can also explain stuff with minimal learning you can get there execute programs build websites of this visual you get quick feedback it's not that difficult anymore I mean often I mentioned you need to inspect things but if you build simple tools for yourself to make your life easier. Often you don't need to do that. The agents write good code. If you work in a company, you need to integrate it in a good code base. You probably should review it. But if you build a small program on your own to make your work more productive, um that's easy. Um just to give you an example that might be random here I bet for example a tool that if I have a video where I talk so I record videos of how I interact with agents then there are certain phases where I just look at the outputs and try to understand things and there are phases where I talk so I just build a tool that recognizes the speech that when I'm saying gets a timestamps then it slices the video so basically I have an entire video where I talk rather than sort of moments where uh nothing happens and that's very easy to do. I built this like in 20 minutes. I think everybody can do it because I didn't look at the code. The agent that did it and then I look at the video I'm like, "Oh yeah, let's do it." Right. If you get started with a feedback loop, um you don't need to code. You just need to inspect the output that you can understand or learn how to execute a Python program or a bash shell and you're there. >> How do you pick what you want to automate? Like how do you how do I think about automation in my life? >> Yeah. So I also um talked about that in a blog post and it can be yeah sort of um sort of uh more intuitive thing and then a more nuance thing. I think the more intuitive thing is like you just think about what could be useful and then can be like something more complex. You say I want an Android app or an iPhone app that does this thing and you initially might think that's complex but then you throw a coation it works immediately. the world's your uh voice. It's like there's so many things that you can just do and you can be very creative and say like what I always wanted to have and it wasn't there. Nobody built this product. Can I build it now? And I think that mindset gives you useful things that makes you more productive. But it also flexes your muscle and sometimes it doesn't work and then you understand like okay add agent cycle this or this is what I still need to learn to make both these kind of things and I think that is sort of the more intrusive perspective that's very useful and that quickly get you started on the path where you say like um I mean first there's excitement then it's sort of sober the sober reality but then you pick up again and it's like you realize okay I do like this I get more and more productive day by day that's sort of the more intuitive part the more nuance part is the sort of part that I I learned in automation industry I worked like three years in automation industry in Germany automating factories and it's sort of a very calculated sort of approach where you you look at you how you work you time each of these steps and then you say if I automate this exact step in such a way what could be the payoff how much time would I save and then you calculate what is the productivity gain and then you calculate how much time do I need to develop this automation and if you do that you can quickly realize that certain automating certain things will not make a difference the blog post I mentioned emails doesn't really work um and there might be other things like a big thing is like always calendar invites nobody likes to create like invites for a meeting but then if you think about it is you're also very particular about meetings like some days you want more meetings you meeting day or you say like ah I can put this in before lunch an agent doesn't know that and if you specify that to an agent you could also just create the calendar invite this meeting by flight and it it doesn't increase productivity by much and so there are a lot of problems if you think about this nuance way and can say like okay I don't do that but ah this this will help me >> and then on your end what have you learned or observed in terms of agents what works what currently doesn't work but will work soon how to manage them. >> I think there there there's two broad um things I I I've noticed for agents. So the first is um making the agents effective uh ends up being a lot like managing um junior folks on your team or or at a company. So for example, the new intern who who shows up on your team um you're not going to go to the intern and say, "Hey, go fix our revenue for the year, double our revenue for the year," or something like that. like maybe you'll try that once, but you're you're unlikely to to see um the the payoff from that. Um instead, what you often do with junior folks is you say, "Hey, here's a first little task that you can do that in to get to know this complicated codebase and here are the things that you might run into." Um because you you've kind of done it before. And when you give the agents that context, give them that ability to look at those things, then then they can usually figure things out. The other bit is that when you have a a new person on your team, you maybe won't give them access to all the production credentials and and all the production database and all those things, but you're going to give them enough tools to to be productive. Um, so sometimes there there's this tension between, oh, I don't want my agent to go delete my everything in production, so I'm just going to have it be hamstrung and and watch every little thing it does. Whereas, if you did that with a person, you would never expect that person to be productive. That's another big you kind of want to you know think about the agents as at least today as you know maybe interns or or more junior folks. The other really interesting thing that I've noticed and I think when I think more the educational role of a of a professor and how do you prepare people for this future where agents are going to be such an important part of of workflows is that how do you train for that? And one of the things that I've noticed is that the more expertise somebody has, so whether that's in for example Tim with process automation um or uh expertise in in what I do in kernels and writing these very highly specialized programs, the more expertise you have, the more powerful the agent makes you. And that's because you can work at such a higher level of abstraction. You know what the important things are. You know how to set the direction. um you know what the common pitfalls are like what is easy what's kind of hard what you need to break up into multiple steps. One piece of conversation that um was coming up for for a while was like are agents going to replace all software engineers or things like that or are they going to replace all junior people or something like that. Um I think where we are today that's probably you know clearly not the case anymore. Um where you know if I have a tool to make my team 10x stronger I'm not going to fire nine people on my team. I'm going to say, "Okay, go do this. Become a 100x more productive than you were before." That's one bit. But then also kind of the script for how you become an expert at something. Uh is is probably pretty similar to to the way that it was before. You're going to study things deeply. You're going to try to understand things a lot. Um you're going to want to do things yourself with with your um you know, hands-on and and really get things done. Uh in this world, you know, the chat GPT can teach you a lot of things. I was personally um uh personally I was trying to get Catch APG to teach me all the little ins and outs of how a car works. I don't know how effective it was so far, but um you know there it's it's a lot easier to to learn things now than it was um certainly even five two three years ago. Um so th those are kind of some of the the the things I'd say. So you know you want to treat the agents as if you're you are in that manager role. You want to help them get unstuck. You don't want to just say like throw the agent at the problem, walk away and and never look at it again. Um, but you also want to kind of figure out how to level yourself up so that you can be a better manager, have more domain expertise and and really understand things in a deeper way. >> So the fact that you need to learn and be an expert uh and that doesn't change uh I think that's very interesting and that makes a lot of sense. The question is like if you show up on the job as a you know young kernel engineer and that's your first day typically they would be okay well you do this simple task and that other simple task and then by year two you graduate to a more complex task. How does this sort of hands-on job training look like? >> Right. Yeah. So we we think about this a lot together because you know we're we're still hiring aggressively even in this world where the the the models are very good, the agents are very good. the way we think about it. So, first I actually went, you know, the professor and me went and actually recorded a bunch of lectures on how GPUs work. Um, so I I make everybody watch those and then I still give them um a a task from scratch, which is, okay, go take this flash attention kernel and modify it to do some other thing. You can pick the the extra feature. The nice thing about the agents is that you can dive into that higher impact role in a way that you weren't able to before. So it's really impactful I think when a junior IC goes to try to manage someone for the first time um because you're suddenly starting to think in much more precise terms. So um you know the the classic software engineer thing is hey the PM asked me to do this and wrote this super long doc with all these requirements but then the minute that you try to go ask someone else to do something you realize the specificity that you need when you want to address a feature or something like that. The nice thing about agents is you can almost start to shortcut that process where you can have the junior IC, still be an IC, still do IC style contributions, but they can now act as that manager role and act as their own PM. Um, because when you're communicating with the agents, you need to be as precise about what what you're trying to get done. So, in some sense, I've seen um with the with the really uh you know, the junior folks who are joining my team. So, these are folks fresh out of college or or fresh out of a masters. Um, when they are really gung-ho about understanding and being able to use the AI agents, they're they're able to communicate so much better than in in the olden days. They're they're able to level up their um their level of understanding a lot faster. Um, and then of course they they can do things and build tools at a speed that that um would have been really really hard to do, you know, 5 10 5 10 years ago. And maybe I'll add sort of the educational perspective there because I think it's sort of quite interesting. It's a little bit sort of contrasting. So what is also quite interesting is the educational perspective sort of from agents. I talk quite a bit that um basically use agents or be left behind and that is also true for students but just like as Dan said um you need the domain expertise you need to have some knowledge to use agents. Well, what we're seeing is if we allow students to use agents, they are very productive, but sometimes they build solutions that look correct that are actually very bad or just wrong and they don't realize. We at this point where it's almost very difficult to learn both domain expertise and uh a agent use. That's a very difficult balance to achieve uh because we don't want to have students that don't understand things, but we also want to have students that um and basically can use agents and so if they can't do that, they will not be effective in the workforce. What Dan said is you already have a pretty good person with strong background knowledge and then that person can level up. They're equipped with agents. But what do you do if you have someone that just learns computer science? How much AC should they learn? how much just um work should you do without agents and that's a very tricky balance and we don't know how to solve it. If we let people use agents, they perform very poorly on basic knowledge. And if we let people just do the balancing knowledge, they don't know how to use agents and they can't compete. So they can't do useful work in the in the workforce nowadays. Maybe the their solution is do all sort of the basic knowledge first and then agents. But that's not what students do. Students have access to these AI tools. They will use them because it's easy. And so maybe the solution is just you need a way of thinking and of working with information and knowledge that you don't understand and develop. I mean there's critical thinking. I think this goes beyond critical thinking. You basically need to uh basically know the unknown unknowns things that you didn't consider and don't understand and that you didn't even think about. you need to have that ability to think more about that to really keep up with agents because I think in the future it's realistic that we work on problems that we don't understand that agents understand but we need to keep up in some way um that would be difficult. >> All right. So to switch ts as we uh get uh closer to the end of this conversation what are you guys currently working on? what's top of mind for you at um Allen Institute on the one hand, together on the other hand, whoever wants to take it first. >> Well, we have actually sort of a very exciting project that will be released uh very soon in the next weeks and um so I worked quite a bit of efficiency. Um, I've been switching my work basically to coding agents and so we will have a major release of an open source coding agent that has a couple of key features. For one, training is 100 times cheaper. Um, you need to generate synthetic data, then you need to train on it. And so we have a method that's 100 uh roughly 100 times cheaper, but still get state-of-the-art performance. And then uh we have another sort of major result uh which um you can almost see as a holy grail of open source um models and that is we can take a private codebase like you have a company you have this codebase uh cloud doesn't know your codebase but um you have the data you can find a model in it so uh what we have is you can just point our method to that repository you don't need to have any sort of tests or um need to understand how to generate the data. It's just automatic. You quickly generate the data and then you have um an agent that is as a frontier model, but you can have like a 32 billion agent. You can deploy locally. You can have an army of specialized models for particular tasks for particular code bases and so forth. And uh yeah, I think that that is a very powerful results. All that is also packaged with um a science of coding agents. There are a lot of confounding factors, a lot of hidden things in papers that are not mentioned. We sort of unearth them, uh, build scaling laws and show what does matter and what doesn't matter. And if you put all of that together, I think the sheet agents, very few GPUs, everybody can use it and very easily. We unblock people by revealing all the sort of secrets. I think there will be a vast change in terms of how quickly we can progress in coding agents. >> Very cool. What about you, Dan? Yeah. So together I think the the the major question that we're trying to answer today is we have all these powerful AI models that that can do all these amazing things. They're very expensive to run today. So you know the the question in all the public markets is like is OpenAI going to be able to turn a profit um ever. Um and what's really exciting about together is that we are kind of on the forefront of getting the these models to to use the hardware as as good as it can. Um, we talked a little bit about training, you know, ear early on in the podcast. At inference time, when the when when you have the model, when it's already been trained, already been post-trained, the hardware utilization is like less than 5%. Um, so it's it's at a place where there's so much more that we can do. There's so much more efficiency that that we can push out of these. And we're really excited about figuring out how to use the hardware the the best way that we can. Um, whether it's serving, you know, customers like Curser or or whatever the the next great foundation model company is. Um, but yeah, we're we're really excited about pushing that frontier and then really getting us to this future that the that, you know, if these models are going to be as impactful as you think, if they're going to be running everywhere, running your daily lives, uh, you know, running your toaster, uh, well, we better make it the the best possible toaster that we can. >> Do you want to talk about uh, Mega Kernels and Together Atlas for a minute? >> Together Mega kernels, Together Atlas. These are both um, projects along these lines. So, let me dive into the mega kernels first. So to understand this uh the the first thing when we say kernels is we usually mean we are going to write a specialized GPU program for a single operation in a model um you can think of as model as one of these train models is like ABC different operations in a row and there will be hundreds of these and the way that we've been writing kernels for the whole history of let's say call it Nvidia hardware is that you really specialize a single kernel for a single operation with these mega kernels we're doing something quite interesting which is we can take the entire model, however many billions of parameters, and put it into a single GPU kernel. Um, and with that, you can start to do a lot more fine grain optimization than you were able to do before. Uh, it actually starts to make the Nvidia GPU look a little bit more like a Cerebras chip or look a little bit more like a Samanova chip in terms of the the optimization that you're able to do. And this is really critical at inference time. So, we're able to see 2x sometimes 3x speed ups um over even highly optimized inference engines. Um, so we're working on bringing that to um uh to to really work in production, bring bring it to fruition and and use it across our whole stack together. Atlas is another really great uh interesting research project that we've done recently where we can get the model. There's this uh there's this technique called speculative decoding that we use at inference where basically we have a little model that is trying to guess what the big model is going to do and because of the ways that we've designed language models. If the little model guesses correctly, you basically get those tokens for free. Um so if you do the speculative decoding right, you can get again 2x 3x speed ups um over over you know just just running a a vanilla model. Um, with Together Atlas, we do one extra thing, which is we say, "Okay, we can get that little model and we can actually adapt it to your traffic." The longer you use this model, the more it learns the patterns of what you're asking, of what you're saying, and it can actually get faster over time. Um, so all these things, you know, we we have efficiency in mind, inference efficiency in particular, and we're all kind of pushing towards um making making all these things faster. What are you excited about for 2026 at a reasonably granular level? Like what what do you think happens? What do you think doesn't happen? >> Yeah. So I think they're both sort of um I'm sort of split. I think a lot of things will be very boring and not much innovation, but then we also surprised by a couple of things that we maybe don't see. And I think actually sort of in the frontier we will be less surprised. I mean it's no secret that we ran out of pre-training data and as Dan said like these are sort of the muscles. Then you can sort of smooth over and you smooth over with synthetic data and um that's how you build coding agents um on lots and lots of different environments and combine the data. U we make some progress there but I think you already see the machine learns. I don't think coding agents will be that much better. The user experience will probably improve. uh but um you see it that um all these models get almost equally good like if I use um I had my u config like uh GLM 4.7 setup and I used it and I thought I was using Opus 4.5 and then later realized oh wait I use a different model because they keep quite similar and so I think we see less progress there where I think we see more progress is um actually the small models if you train smaller models on more specialized data, they can do quite well. And the smaller models you get, they're pretty powerful. A 100 billion parameter models, you can fit it pretty well. Even sort of low-grade data center GPU like an RTX 6,000 cost $6,000. I think for a lot of companies, it will be very interesting. They don't need to rely on the frontier models. The small models might even be better because of specialized. big problem and like uh Anthropic CEO pointed it out you have these powerful open rate models but nobody uses them because the deployment is so complex and that is because once you go beyond 8 GPUs that you first need the users to make it efficient but then also very complicated in systems there's no open source system that can do that at the moment you need disagregated infrance separation across sequence lengths and so forth perhaps um we can build this we can build this also for an HGPU machine for smaller models and then the efficiency that you see with a 100 billion model will rival what frontier models have. So you will get the efficiency of small models. You get the flexibility of small models. Performance on the frontier will stagnate but on the smaller level we get more more powerful models still because you can distill from these large models into these small models and taken together. I think that will change things. >> I'm also you know really excited about small models. I think uh we're going to see a lot more capability out of them. Um I'll be watching the open source uh models pretty closely. I think uh you know with things like JM 4.7, you're starting to see it. You're starting to see the open source models rival some of um at least our current best Frontier models. Uh I think we're going to see another big jump in open source capabilities this year. Um I'm really excited to see new hardware. So we're starting to hear a little bit about Reuben, uh the next generation of Nvidia uh GPUs. I think we're starting to hear a bit about the AMD 400 series of GPUs. Um really excited to see kind of what that next jump in hardware capabilities is even as we haven't fully kind of used even the current generation of hardware. I'm excited to see what people do kind of with all the other modalities. I think last year video generation models had a little bit of a moment with Sora 2 with with Gemini um and and VO I think they called it. Really excited to see what what they can do. Um, and yeah, really excited to just just see, you know, what is that frontier of of intelligence that you can get on your laptop or on your phone and how fast can you push it? How how far can you push it? I think it's never been a more exciting time to work in AI. >> You both mentioned state space architectures earlier in the conversation. Do you think that's part of the near future that we sort of evolve to post transformer architectures whether state space ja world models whatever direction is that something that you see in the near-term horizon and that you think is uh desirable? >> I think uh in a lot of places they're they're already there. So some of the best audio models in the world are at least partially based on state space models. I think Nvidia released a bunch of really great hybrid models recently. I think uh Neotron is is what they called them. And so there there's a lot of really great um work kind of there already. Um I think we will see the architectures continue to evolve. So um in some sense the deepseek MLA compression takes some of those ideas. Uh one of the miniax models had sort of a linear attention idea. So I think you're going to see a lot more diversity in architectures. You're kind of already seeing it. Um but certainly certainly I think out of the Chinese labs where um there isn't really an open AI of China right so there there isn't like an open AI orthropic or or or a Google gem right that kind of brings all these you know these um centers of like product and model and revenue and all those together. So um I think you see a lot more risk takingaking out of the Chinese labs where you're trying to differentiate the next model your next open source model. One way to do that is architecture. Um another way to do that of course is just pure quality. So I think we're we're going to see a lot more explosion of of different architectures. >> All right. Well, this has been a fascinating conversation. Really appreciate the time and insight and thoughts. Thank you so much. Really appreciate it. >> Yeah, thank you so much, Matt. >> Thanks so much for having us. Great to see you, Tim. This was a lot of fun. >> Hi, it's Matt Turk again. Thanks for listening to this episode of the Mad Podcast. If you enjoyed it, we'd be very grateful if you would consider subscribing if you haven't already, or leaving a positive review or comment on whichever platform you're watching this or listening to this episode from. This really helps us build a podcast and get great guests. Thanks, and see you at the next episode.


## Tim Dettmers: Personal Side of Academia, How to pick your Grad School, RTX 3000 FAQ

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RvwynqDUoQE

[Music] hey this is sayam bhutani and you're listening to chai time data science a podcast for data science enthusiasts where i interview practitioners researchers and calculus about their journey experience and talk all things about data science [Music] welcome to chai with great thinkers and researchers ctds dot show in this episode i interviewed tim detmers asu student at uw for the second time on the show in this episode we talk a lot about research in general and the personal aspect of research which isn't covered as much how you should pick a grad school is creativity important in academia and if these topics sound familiar tim has already written blog posts on these which we discuss in this interview so you can also check out the blog post from the show notes i think we talk a lot about personal side of things while you're going through the process of exploration in research in general or in life in general i think that's that's one aspect that has been missing from this podcast so i hope you love this conversation and it's as insightful for you as it was for me we also talked about the rtx 3000 series and a few of the issues that were happening at the time of release or at the time of recording which is we didn't really have figured out how to put multiple of these together and this intro is being recorded at that time as well so i'm not sure if these have been solved yet but now without further ado here's the complete conversation with tim ditmers please enjoy the show [Music] i am honored to be talking to tim again on the podcast uh tim thank you so much for saying yes to my second request of course uh thank you for having me so uh the last interview for anyone who's watched it was very insightful about how to approach research problems but i think you had slightly hinted towards personal side of things i'd love to die more you had hinted towards following passion and alternate parts of education would love to talk more about the same and your perspectives on them yeah of course so i i know you followed alternate paths as well throughout your research career you tried kaggle for a while after which you joined in a research program is is there a hesitancy to that as well because it's it's not conforming to the reform how do you avoid that so for me the hesitation was a little before that so even performance machine learning i sort of explored different areas and i was not totally sure they also like sort of often practical bottlenecks i was very interested in psychology for example but i have i'm dyslexic so i cannot read and write well and so i couldn't perform well in the exam so it was impossible to become a psychologist and i don't know over time i i learned something about different fields neuroscience psychology statistics and it all came back together into sort of machine learning and then deep learning and so for me at some point it was clear i wanted to do something in that direction but it was not entirely clear if i want to have like a data scientist job um do i want to do gets pretty specialized to consulting do i want to build my own startup do i want to do research and i think there it's also sort of um yeah just experimenting a little bit so and you can see it as like a funnel and so i funneled further and further into sort of a niche gradient descending into a cinema yeah exactly yeah it's basically the same principle you try a couple of things you zigzag around the optimization surface and you just go further down and i mean i think everyone that's getting bit older and older will tell you that over time sort of the paths and lives they get more constricted you can always change but it costs more energy and so um i think a good strategy is just to explore enough a lot of people go down one path and they end up on the spot where they don't want to be and then they oh i i got here and i didn't explore enough what now and so um on the other hand people are also afraid they say oh i'm i'm 25 i'm 27 and i start my bachelor's degree i'm really old and they're all these young people around me um yeah i think both cases you shouldn't be afraid of that um i was very old when when i did my bachelor's degree master's degree i'm usually the oldest person in the room and when we have a meeting in our phd i mean except for the professors um so yeah i don't know uh i'm very happy where i am now and i think it's a part of exploration and exploitation finding sort of the things that suit you and are practical but also sort of exploring the right amounts to not get lost in a certain details how do you find uh areas where that are fascinating enough but aren't just a random interest that that will fade away and how do you continue with that because initially when you switch directions it's frustrating and the initial path is slow and it's all almost very hard to give up the speed or the momentum that you already have in your field yeah yeah that's a good question uh it's it's not always easy um i also see it sort of with my phd when you want to get to grad school you need to be very competitive very focused on like oh i need to get publications i need a good letters i need good grades and all these things but once you're on a phd everything opens up and um you should really do what you enjoy doing and so i think you have similar balances when you're sort of exploring different careers um and it's maybe a bit more subtle um but um yeah it's it's difficult i think when what i did is i already entered myself um on growth it was like i was doing kegel competitions and at first i i failed and then and it didn't really work then i got more skills and everything worked better and then i coded my own deep neural networks and then suddenly i was really well and i went second place on one competition and they felt wow that feels really good and i did other competitions did well but at some point their stimulation returns yeah i felt like yeah i kind of know how to do it now maybe i learn something else maybe i explore something else and so i still go for something that i enjoy and i'm passionate about but it's also for me exploitation stopped when i stopped learning enough and um you cannot do this forever as i said you cannot explore forever at some point you need to exploit a little bit more but um often people underestimate how much the time how much time they have to really do that and so um i think it's also very sort of personal and it's it's different from person to person it's different from personality but also sort of where where they are in life what resources they have what people are around them what community they have um but taken all together uh i think if you think a little bit about in those terms like what do i learn how do i grow um and um do i explore enough i think that's sort of a good thinking about it yeah that's a great insight and even off of the record we were talking about patients in general across any career path there's always while exploring a new field there's this initial motivation and then there's the final path where you learn a lot between there's a lot of frustrations where oh yeah which is really hard to navigate do you think exploring different parts early in your career has helped you even in research because research also takes a lot of tenacity uh definitely definitely um i mean i i was very sort of curious about philosophy psychology neuroscience statistics and it gives me many insights that other people don't see um if i look at some results i can very carefully evaluate uh what kind of knowledge they contain because of my statistical knowledge um it can really dissect um yeah what results mean and which results are basically meaningless you can't say too much about them uh it cuts away from this hype it cuts away through sort of figures and all these things that try to fool you um and i don't know other fields neuroscience um it's always nice to to understand a bit more how does a brain do it and how what can you learn from that uh it's not always straightforward it's very deep learning and neuroscience is very distant but you can take some ideas and you've seen in literature that some ideas were taken and they were important and i feel like philosophy always helps in any situation just have certain different angle a different perspective on things multiple perspectives holds contradictory thoughts at the same time that sort of thing and so for other people they will have dabbled in other things and so they will have different strengths and different weaknesses but i feel it's always like very helpful to explore in the beginning a lot and then just narrow down over time in your in your uh writer uh of creativity in academia i think you touch upon this and you're definitely on the side of creativity and you you mentioned this earlier as well children uh at a younger age they really come up with very creative solutions compared to adults who are very conformed um so yeah so that's very curious um if you think about creativity it's um people think it's like coming up with ideas coming up with novel ideas and so if you just look at null ideas children are extremely good at it there is this task where um where you get spaghettis and marshmallows and you're supposed to build sort of structures and the highest structure possible and so if you compare adults and children children do on average much better because they don't care about what they build they just stick things together and they want to make fun looking things and they're just creative about it they have no restrictions that makes them creative and adults say oh a brick is used for buildings but nothing else and sort of that doesn't feel very creative but um all this sort of thinking lacks um aside and that you see that in particular in physics physics undergrad say they often and it's very common that they sort of say oh i have the unified theory of everything i wrote down here's the math everything works out it's beautiful and then they go to their professor and the professor gets like annoyed and says like go away and uh you got nothing he doesn't even look at it um because he knows it's just nonsense and that's because to have certain kinds of creativity you just need expertise you first need to understand what is actually a good argument and what is not what is like a permissible and so that is actually the other opposite it's basically the brick taken to an extreme that a particular brick is only for a particular type of building enough not for anything else and that so because there's certain rules that you need to abide by and if you don't abide by these rules it doesn't have any sort of value what you're doing and so for that you need lots of expertise and very few ideas are valid and creativity is really really hard but um if you want to think about like uh the general theory of relativity um you cannot be really creative and think oh it could be like this or this or this there's just one way how it's right and you need to figure out that and so um yeah i think um uh often we get maybe a little bit uh depressed to see other people so species so creative especially in sort of other branches like music i talk about music uh how they combine different genres and that sort of thing feels very easy and if you're doing research it's really difficult to come up with these new ideas but that's because you need much more expertise in research it's just at the edge of knowledge and you cannot just take two things and punch them together and have a good result and most of the time if you do that it doesn't work and you need to do try it over and over and over and over again and sometimes maybe it works and so yeah this blog post about creativity was mostly about um yeah don't be too hard on yourself and research and in general also in engineering if you're in kaggle competitions um you need a lot of expertise and so not all solutions are valid only a few solutions develop and creativity is just more difficult under those circumstances that's that's i think a recurring theme from grand masters as well i i talked to people who had won gold medals and their perspective was it takes 500 to 600 even for some of them to get a gold medal and these are grand masters who have been competing for 10 years and that's almost counterintuitive i wouldn't take part in a competition if i knew it'll take me 10 years plus that amount of efforts to to get into a medal yeah yeah that's right and um so when i did kaggle it was much easier and it was easier because sort of the expertise wasn't so widely available so now in keckle like a lot of people just know how to do it do the basics basically a lot of people know much more details and so you have the same problem that as the expertise gets sort of larger and larger it gets much more difficult to make this difference with your creativity in the end that is what matters but in the end that is also which is just so difficult if things get so competitive and so require so much expertise and so yeah i can definitely see that you need a lot of effort a lot of patience uh to really get there um yeah i think you you'd agree and even in your blog post you'd agree on this which is we need creativity in academia how how do we leverage the already the knowledge that already exists how do we use that uh to to fast track us into creativity there are many people in academia and you've you've discussed this who look down upon people who are creative uh generally marketing is looked down upon in engineering content creation isn't as expected but that i think contributes to some extent but in rigorous academic uh processes as well how do you think we can come up with creativity so i think i mean there are many ways to be creative and different kinds of people and how they work and a different way to be creative i mean there are people that just go into depth and depth and depth and they just look at a very specific thing take a couple of things around it bunch it together and try to find something new and then there are people that um that are a bit more like i'm also a bit more like that that double the lip and neuroscience look a bit here a little bit there look a bit in the future and think really oh what what what will deep neural networks be like in five years what will be like in ten years and so what must be true in ten years what kind of networks will we use and sort of um it's a bit uh big picture thinking and so you'd try to get these sort of high level ideas bring them back to your level and then integrate them into sort of um the local neighborhood in which you work and so i think um that's essentially the crux of creativity in this local neighborhood you need to draw something in you need to draw a new material but there are different ways how to do it yeah and uh again that brings us back to the alternate parts of uh research or even education which is when you try to combine two fields that are very different or maybe three fields and lie at the intersection of them not at the expertise level but just at the intersection that's that's also very interesting place to be definitely yeah if you is actually interesting if you look at academia and if you look at the people with the most citation i mean there always of course it's a couple of outliers but if you look at the average the people that have the most citations are the people between fields because they often can combine ideas that are very distant for two groups of people and so the difficulty is basically not only understanding the ideas but then also communicating so that both of these groups can understand it and then suddenly there's a bridge and all these ideas flow and all these ideas flow through basically the ideas of this one person or this one group and um so that's where the citations flow and that's why they have so much influence because it's so valuable to connect uh yeah different different fields and similarly it it's always also true in many other areas um um if you for example have more rigorous background statistics than in kaggle competition where some variables are very important you can do a much detailed analysis and much more rigorous analysis and you're much more robust to sort of um generalization in the unseen test set because you have sort of this statistical mindset of really finding the details in the data rather than using a big model or sort of a complicated model or ensembling and so um similarly if you have other sort of expertise you can always sort of combine that to um just uh improve your get get certain strengths in your performance and of course you always have certain weaknesses but i think that's also an interesting thing we're all a little bit different so for for someone who's uh let's say inspired by this conversation and they want to try a feel that they have not picked up yet uh how should they go about it there are many parts into it uh you can read a book from cover to cover you can take an online course which which ones do you enjoy personally um so when i look back i usually learn the most when i do things and so if i take an online class um good example schedule competitions i didn't i mean i took like um the the entering machine learning class and jeff hinton's deep learning class and that was helpful but it was was only a start it was just to get the set of basic concepts and if you read the machine learning book it will not help you to do well in kaggle competitions competitions just about practice and understanding over time just doing the things coding the things experimenting seeing what works seeing what doesn't read in the forum see what other people doing copy their code extinct around with it experiment with it and see what you can learn and in general when you put it like that it sounds awful a lot similar to academia as well due to an outsider like me doesn't it um yeah but uh i feel like in general you can also see then this is just a very good way of learning things just learning things by books can help um but it doesn't help you if you need to do things it helps you to understand things so if you want to give a lecture about machine learning then maybe reading your books better than doing kegel competitions but if you want to build models and actually do things then that's what you need to do i think you learn the things to learn the things that you want to do you need to do them and so um for different purposes different modes of doing uh our best i think absolutely there's this pros and cons to both some people agree some people disagree then there are amazing people like you who lie at the intersection and have a really great perspective on both sides another point in your journey is grad school which you're going through right now you have an amazing blog post uh title picking your grad school uh would love to dive into that how did you go about picking your grad school i know you uh you mentioned in your post that you're really enjoying so what were your uh key factors while uh deciding your grad school yeah um yeah in that blog post i lay out different set of perspectives and i use all the sort of different perspectives to make uh different decisions so what people a lot of people do is sort of they have a very career focused perspective and they look at the grad school and say oh if i do this grad school and i pick this advisor then oh this person is really famous and published papers and then i get to a better sort of school and i become a professor or i get into a big company and and i learn lots of money and so they have this sort of mindset but in the end you spend five years in the phd this is not really what will be the most fulfilling bit um you can be successful and and have many other things as well and so why should you just choose to be successful and so people often miss out on other things um i mean of course this sort of career perspective is important and and the most important part is really that you have the best fit with an advisor and so um that's what you should mostly care about basically your advisor and there's certain advising styles and you need to understand a little bit yourself maybe if you did a thesis before you already had worked a little bit with it with an academic and could see maybe um what his or her advising style is and if it suits you and so you could look for something similar or maybe the opposite if it didn't wasn't so good and so um it's very personal but sort of in this blog post i try to look at all different kinds of angles all different kinds of people's what they could enjoy and so you just need to be aware who you are and with whom you work well and so once you have that you can narrow it down you can say oh these schools with these advisors um they're probably good but that's not enough i mean you should go further and so what i talk about um which is often other talk about other perspectives of some forgotten and that's also very sort of personality based uh and so i talk about sort of identity stability and variability and so i talked for before about exploration exploitation and this basically is stability and variability so um a lot of people focused uh very very hard to get into grad school but by doing that they missed out on a lot of other stuff in life and so you don't you just don't want to do always sort of writing papers doing research there are more things and so each school is sort of embedded in a different city in a different culture and so are there enough things that you can explore are there enough things that you might be you maybe said oh i wanted to learn and play an instrument oh i wanted to do boulder oh i like hiking but i couldn't go on so many hikes and does the school offer that to you can you do the things that you said yeah i probably enjoy it but i never really tried it and so that is sort of this perspective of is enough things that i can still grow as a person not only research but in other areas uh the stability is expected of exploitation if you know like certain things are really really important for me i have a good friend and for him is really important oh i need he says i need mountains i want i want to ski and if i don't have mountains around it's not a good life for me and so he knows that and so if you're a person like that then you choose university where mountains are near um and so that can be a very important factor if you don't have that maybe you're successful maybe you can explore things but maybe you're miserable because the most important thing that you really enjoyed in life is no longer there and so yeah that's that's important and i mean stability there should also say the most important factor are just people you want to have good people around you and when you visit a school uh you can look at the people you can see other like-minded people are there people that sort of i could myself see myself hanging out with uh also what is the culture do they have sort of social events where you come together and just have a good time that doing grad school which can be quite hard gives you enough stability to really stick to it and really um yeah just have uh do a good good good job do do your good work uh live happily uh don't be like depressed uh mental health issues are much higher in phd students than the general population and so that's an important fact to know and so stability is an important factor and it should be considered um so beyond these two factors i also talk about identity and so um when i visited schools there were some schools where um or i met many other students when i visited schools from other schools where was also admitted and some of these students are very sort of uh entitled um they would look around they will look at your name tag and then see oh that university no i don't want to talk to that person and um yeah you think twice do i really want to go to university where these people came from um because and i mean if you meet one or two person from that you say oh just just this weird person but if if you um meet like 10 of them uh it kind of it gets weird it gets like oh it's probably their culture it's probably that's how they see themselves they see themselves as the best and then the question is uh do you also want to be like them and some people maybe say um yeah they are the best and they should feel like that but maybe you want to be a bit more humble and um i don't know when i when i visited seattle um i got this feeling that people are just a bit more humble they're a bit more friendly if i compare new york with seattle it's like such a big difference like in new york people are aggressive and you need to walk fast and you feel that's the fastest slave yes yes and and settle much more relaxed and sort of um cast let you cross they wave you over and uh i don't know um one thing that i also write in the blog post i found a very impressive um and in germany that's not common and switzerland i also didn't see it is like the the people always thank the bus driver and so you have these very long buses and that sort of tilt in the middle and people are at the end of the bus and they get off the bus and they say thank you and um it's not not just for sure they mean it you see it in their face they just want to thank the bus driver they think this is important and they say like this is who i am for me it's important to thank other people that helped me and so um yeah i don't know that was also appealing and as i wrote in the blog post that may seem like strange why would you pick a grad school for that but um i mean now that i am at uw at university of washington i can feel that a lot of people share this sort of sentiment and it's it's also i guess they have culturally adapted it's just how people are in the city it's just how people are at the university and so um it's just a nice environment and it's just the person that i want to want to be i want don't want to be the cocky person that looks down on other people and doesn't thank the bus driver uh i rather want to be the opposite and i guess yeah taking all these sort of considerations into account university of washington was the best fit for me i i also would would like to know your thoughts on this i know you talk a lot about aids bringing in patients into into life in general people in my age group at least when i look around at my peers we're driven by hey i want success i don't care about life i don't care about social life i just want to get to the best university get the best advisor right papers that get accepted into best conferences uh get a high paying job maybe it's just my circle but most of the people that i've interacted with have this perspective what advice would you have for such people because i think at a younger age you're more driven to that aspect of life i think yeah um i mean you need a balance uh it's it's not necessarily wrong to have that perspective but you need to recognize that that perspective doesn't age well um and there is this and especially academia but in general in life there's this effect where you have a commun cumulative advantage so the more advantage you have the easier this is to get more advantage and so what that does is if you get a little bit of head start at the beginning uh you just get get much easier sort of improvements over time and you see it mostly with like a privilege if you're born like white male and rich your life is easy and so if you're disadvantaged and you get to a point where you have a similar advantage then it's just an easier life but at some point um they are no longer the sort of these benefits if you have reached a certain level of privilege um it it it doesn't add up it just doesn't improve your life much more and i mean if you don't live in poverty uh things are pretty good uh and if you can do the things that you sort of love things are pretty good and so once you reach that you should look for other things you should look for a balance and a lot of people find it difficult because sort of this race for success that's what they known all their life there's almost this element of regret hey am i missing out on that by not doing this this this almost this urging regret uh yes yes and uh i mean as i said before um they are sort of a balance of exploration exploitation and but also practicality and so um yeah if if i don't know if um if i look at indians for example they are disadvantaged sort of in the global race for competition i mean i as as a white male i just have more privilege and it's easier for me and so um it has some benefit to try to rise to the top but at some point you need to sort of change direction and that is sort of difficult that can also stifle your performance strangely enough if you are successful enough it doesn't help anymore to strive for success uh you need to remain as i said with creativity it's a lot with exploration so if you just exploit and exploit and exploit all the time at some point it's actually no longer exploitation it's just um almost stupidity um and so it's difficult to find this jump off point where you say okay i'm in a good enough spot now i need to look around and really broaden my view and sort of um yeah i think that is sort of you should continuously reflect am i at this point am i at this point uh or you can also say is the other way around that maybe you explored a lot and maybe you are lit it got a little bit disadvantaged is it now time to exploit and so i think overall it's like very difficult to sort of balance that but it should be a balance i wouldn't say one side is wrong or the other side is one or the other side is wrong and but it's like a balance that sort of need to be personally assessed over and over again i feel like you said it's it's uh you should know when you should take your foot off the pedal and you need to constantly uh look at yourself uh critique what's going on it's really hard when you're in that mindset when you have been doing it for so long and you have the momentum to just yes break free yes i see it also a lot of them phd students i mean grad school is really competitive uh the the entry requirements are so high and there are so many people that want to get into a deep learning machine learning nlp phd and so i think all these lot of papers so much work and as i said good grades and everything and then they get in and they still have this mindset and they stress themselves out they do mediocre research because they say oh i need to get this paper out it needs to be out this month otherwise i don't have enough papers to serious and it just leads to bad research um and so it takes those students often like a year or two to readjust and to sort of recalibrate and i mean you shouldn't be too harsh on yourself it just takes some time especially if you did this for for a long time but you should be conscious of it and you should strive to get to a balance for for people who aren't maybe that far into their career how how should they pick uh their research interests maybe they're just driven to research in general they haven't tried the field and they're just going in to explore how should they pick the areas of interest yeah um i believe that in general it feels like there are less opportunities than there is demand in research and also in other domains of life and so often it's about making sort of a balance of what do you want what was what are the opportunities sometimes you meet people where you can learn a lot from them and maybe it's not exactly what you wanted to do but maybe it's worth to take take up that knowledge maybe it's worth to explore how is it to be like this person how how is it to be how can i think like this person and that that's worthwhile and so again there's not not really a hard rule but um you should look at things uh what you can learn what you can exploit are there certain opportunities which are just worth it even though it's a little bit different from what you really really wanted i mean as i said if you're very early in your career it's quite valuable to explore and so if a good opportunity arises and it's a little bit different why not just explore it and learn a little bit and then say yeah it wasn't wasn't quite for me but but i got some knowledge i got some connections and maybe this sort of opportunity helps me to go somewhere else and often it's like that and so yeah um it's difficult to sort of give direct advice it's very personal um but um yeah just just look around see what he can learn i feel in general you also need to be seated in a good balanced life in order in order to be oh yeah able to go through the frustration of as as you explorer feel you get into different direction then maybe you don't love it as much as anymore yeah yeah it's it's like sometimes there can be sports of just going down one part path very narrow and a lot of people do that to get into grad school but once you're in grants you need to open up a funnel and so it's difficult to make these decisions sometimes a balance means uh balance means a balance over time not necessarily right now i need this balance yeah um it's like um think a bit ahead look a bit in the past uh look what the situation is right now look at the opportunities look what he can learn look at what you need to do in order to to get what's uh uh and to basically show what society wants you to have and uh yeah and bring that all together so this is complicated but yeah uh that also brings me to the next question you had this interesting uh thought provoking tweak which is uh what are the most important problems in in your domain you're just asked uh people in general as you explore the field what do you think are the important problems in in your areas of research and in general if i may in machine learning that you you find really interesting i mean i have a very extreme position and that's i guess also why i asked in that tweet what other people think and so my sort of position is that if i look in the past it just had a lot to do with compute sort of the most important things were either very efficient or they just use a bit more compute and so if i look at um so there there's like fantastic analysis of um animals how much neurons they have and sort of what is their intelligence and use you find that basically it's almost sort of a linear relationship then the number of neurons is sort of uh very much in line how smart an animal is or how smart we humans are and so i don't know when i look at all this data it for me it seems that yeah we want to use as much compute as we have we want to use as big of a model that we have and that's basically also currently my sort of research direction i work with sparse computing sparse training um so i specifically work with sparsi gated mixtures for experts and so these models you can just grow very very large and they still are very efficient to compute and so they can be a hundred times more efficient than a transformer of the same size in terms of parameters and so that's very powerful um they're also very difficult to train that's that's another thing but um yeah i believe techniques in general that sort of um try to scale with the resources that we have and maybe also exploit the resources that we have in a more efficient manner different kinds of parallelism that sort of thing and different kinds of training technique optimizes um there is like very sort of interesting blog post by also someone from the fast fast ai community about um cyclic learning rates and they get like super convergence on cipher cipher 10 i think it was and the conversion within seconds and um i don't know uh five years ago or so you needed an hour to train a cypher 10 model and so all these tricks put together i think in the end will lead to a sort of much more interesting model with much more interesting behaviors like gpt3 but just even orders and orders of magnitude larger um yeah i think for me personally that is sort of the most promising most interesting direction maybe some people say it's also very boring it's just scaling but if you look at the details there are many interesting problems which are difficult to solve yeah and i just want to drop a plug for the previous interview where we've discussed this in depth along with your uh recent work at that time so for the audience i'd like to know more about that i've i've also really enjoyed your tweet storms on transformer models and i'm sorry i'm an outsider so to me it looks like these are in the opposite direction of your research why did you decide to explore these uh you've been exploring these for a while i think yes so i mean what you're referring to that was like transformers on smaller data sets and so um [Music] there is a paper by opening eye and it looks at the um the scaling lots of neural language models and so what they show is if you have a certain size of a model if you have a certain number of data then you can predict sort of what will be your loss b with a transformer and they show a certain scaling and so if you look at that relationship then it seems very plausible that you can do most of the research with smaller data sets because the results will sort of extrapolate to the bigger data sets so if you know the performance on smaller data sets a couple of data points with different model sizes with different data set sizes you can predict what will this model look like if you have a very large data set a very large model that you can never train but you can predict and say a probably model will look like this if i have this model with this sort of architecture a big model will look like this and so and with that you expect that transformers should probably also do quite well in small data sets uh and there were some results published which showed yes they indeed they they are competitive with lstms even a little bit better that was transformer excel and so nobody could replicate those results and it was very frustrating and i talked with like many colleagues and they said yeah we cannot replicate the results the authors do not reply and everybody knows that and so on twitter somebody was like confused by that and said are these results real and i basically say no these results are not real we cannot replicate it and colleagues also kind of replicate it and so that sort of escalated into a replication challenge and the authors replied and sort of i implemented sort of their suggestions and i could figure out how to actually train a transformer on a small data set and so there it's sort of very important to use a lot of different regularization techniques not only dropout but also special kinds of dropout on the inputs and that sort of artificially makes your data set larger in a sense um it's not sort of a very high quality larger data set but the introduced noise helps a little bit similar how you would for example use cutout in computer vision to augment your data to basically get different versions of the data and so in the end that was a missing piece and so with that uh you can actually say yes transformers are plain better probably for most data set sizes but you need to use very complex regularization to improve over llc and performance it was almost funny sasha rush i think they they had opener opened up a bounty and the authors claimed it by just uploading their code yes yes uh um yeah i was curious um so yeah i don't know uh yeah uh i mean we we i had i emailed him and a couple of other people emailed him and then there was bounty and a couple of minutes we had the code uh so maybe sometimes you need to give people a bit more incentive interesting uh otherwise in general have you explored more ideas of uh training transformers on all smaller data sets outside of that experiment uh yeah i have currently a running experiment and it's a little bit similar to sort of this scaling loss paper from open ai um and i use it for architecture search um yeah and results look promising and uh yeah um currently the projects is of ice because i switched to a different project but i might publish it in the future yeah okay looking forward to that i'll i'll have tim's uh twitter handle in the show notes uh he's very active whenever he comes up with a research idea you can probably find it there uh now coming to the burning topic at least at the time of recording this would go out in a few weeks but uh which is the rtx 3000 series it's almost overhyped that you're just getting thrown with so much content on these what's what's your gpu recommendation in uh i think it's september 2020 what's your recommendation today yeah so so actually the recommendation changed today or yesterday that more data came out and it seems to be confirmed that there is sort of a performance limitation on the rtx 30 series which is just similar to the rtx 20 series and so what they do is so basically nvidia knows that if they enable all the features of the normal architecture on these gpus then nobody will buy quattro cards nobody will or only a few people will buy tesla cards and so they cannot sell these professional cards and so what they do then is to limit the performance a little bit i'm sorry for for people who don't understand can you tell the difference between uh the quadro cards and the rtx cards so the rtx tires are mostly designed for gamers of course people like us just use it for deep learning and it works really well for that but nvidia doesn't like that nvidia wants it to just for gamers and these data sets were banned for data centers so you're no longer allowed to put them in data centers uh some like non-profits and universities they can get an exception for that but usually um they they don't want to have these gamer gpus in data centers and so there are the credit cards and nvidia says oh you should buy the credit cards and the tesla cards they're much better they are perfectly designed for professional people and for researchers and so just buy them they just cost 10 times the price or six times the price and they're great and i mean if you look at their performance in the past they were not better than the gaming gpus but just six times more expensive so who would buy that i had nobody and so nvidia needed to put some incentive on for people to buy these cards and so it seems that in this series again they sort of went for the option to limit the performance a little bit on rtx 30 series cards and so that makes uh upcoming quad records more attractive because they just can compete the others of a bit better performance and makes tesla cards more attractive they have just better performance and so um that's what you get when you have a monopoly they can just do the things to control uh market segments as they wish and um yeah at the time of recording the quarter cards aren't out and i know in the next week uh the gtc conference is coming up but in general uh looking historically did uh do you think the difference is just uh diminishing is it is it in any sense worth worth it to go for the quarter cards yeah so so if you compare the rtx 2080 ti and compared with these quadro rtx cards you see a similar performance you will see a similar performance difference to the rtx 3090 or 3080 compared to these new cardboard quads that will come out probably soon and so you can expect sort of a difference about similar to that and the a100 is a bit different gpu uh it's much faster so the tesla 100 but also much more expensive so yeah there you cannot make like the the straight comparison but you can expect sort of the quattro cards and the rtx card to be comparable to the last series basically in a relative performance to each other uh and apart from that in general you have recommended to still look at older used cards uh which which cards do you recommend uh for different use cases i know you have it on the blog but just want to cover that on the podcast as well yeah yeah so i mean sort of in in the light of these sort of updated results um if you have like already an rtx 20 series card it probably makes not so much sense to upgrade actually only if you need memory if you have other use cases like kaggle or trying to learn deep learning or just just try a couple of things out with deep blurring you don't need a big gpu and so you don't need a rtx 30 series um and so there's sort of different options there is like one gpu i think is a gtx 1050 it doesn't need an external power supply so if you have a computer with like a power supply that has enough watch you can just plug it into the main board if you have a slot if you don't need new components uh you don't need a new machine just plug in the gpu and you can work a little bit this is only enough to sort of try a couple things out but it can you can get taste for it and if you like it you can invest into a real machine so that's like very cheap option beyond that um i would recommend tensor core enable gpus they just give you better performance and then i'm sorry to bring up the stupid question again what is the tensor core for the uninitiated yeah so the tensor core is basically a special unit on the gpu that's just designed for matrix multiplication and so usually what a computer does it sort of um queues up all these sort of floating point operations like a times b and it has a lot of them in parallel and it computes all of them but sort of each computational unit can just compute one of them and at a time and so what the tensor code does is it doesn't compute one at a time it computes entire matrix products of four times four uh multiplying with four times four matrix these are a lot of uh multiplications a lot of additions and it does it like in the same time as a normal core would uh process uh basically um a fourth of a single floating point number so very high throughput you can put it through a lot of matrix multiplication sort of compute through the score and so um you can say roughly one tensor core is as powerful as like 50 normal cores uh where i mean you see this specification with cuda costs and tens of course you shouldn't really look at cuda costs it's a bit more complicated than that but um in other words tenth of course is just very powerful compute units that compute very quickly matrix multiplication and also convolutions that are represented at matrix multiplication so for deep learning performance absolutely critical they speed up your networks quite a bit which which graphic cards uh have have the 10 seconds uh the rtx series and beyond or before that as well so um there are tx series and sort of athlete there are some some special sort of gpus uh but i think they have the gtx uh um pre-flag so i think there's a gtx 1660 for example it doesn't have tens of course so as long as the name has rtx in it i think you can pretty sure that it has tens of course so many people at least in india we don't have the used market as big uh when we're looking at buying a new gpu which which number should we look at a lot of it is marketing this memory that has a stupid amount of gbps which doesn't really make sense what numbers should we really look at while trying to compare these because yeah just want to point out that there are so many aib cards as well which have the cores core numbers are the same throughout most of them uh just start the frequency changes a lot so how should we compare these when trying to buy a new one yeah so in general i would say if you have these different versions of gpu with super clocked and higher higher megahertz and that sort of thing uh ignore that and just look at the gpu name that's important and uh basically what the name stands for and that's the memory and the most important factors and memory bandwidth and so first you should look at uh or think about what things do i want to train what what things do i want to do with this gpu and how much memory does it require so if you just do inference and want to train yolo and just use yolo for for something you don't need much memory inference is very cheap if you want to train networks it depends if you want to train on small data sets or if you want to train a big big transformer on a very big data set and and that sort of makes the difference between 80 gigabytes of memory is enough or 24 gigabytes is feels kinda small and so um so uh yeah you need to first think about that once you have that one of the best option is to really look at the memory bandwidth and so just look at your budget what can i afford and then what is the gpu with the highest memory bandwidth that fulfills my memory requirements that i can afford um you can also look at my sort of blog blog post within our list cost performance and so i think in general that's what's most interesting for people they just want to know oh i have this a budget what's the best gpu what gives me the best performance and with that shot you can sort of figure it out but as i said first you should make sure that it has enough memory that's first requirement but uh tim in general outside of your blog boost and these two interviews we don't have many resources and when you try to look up aib cards you always get thrown with the numbers of hey this one cools better uh this one is slightly faster do they really matter in your experience uh yes but it's optimized for gaming so that means usually if you have one gpu these cards really cool better and so you see it also in crypto mining rigs they have certain fans that they prefer because they run cooler and also because they can replace the fans uh easier more easily they can get like china made fans and just replace them when they break but um the thing is if you stack them next to each other then some of these designs don't work so well anymore and so that is often not considered and so in the last sort of uh founder series of nvidia they had the problem that single gpu cool very well but if you pair with multiple gpus it could terrible and you it overheats and so um in my my computer and university i have extenders so cables that extend the gpu so you don't have to put it in a slot and so if you have that there's just enough space between gpus and then you have better cooling performance so yes these temperatures do increase certain fan designs are better but it depends how much space is there between gpus so let's say and i i know many people in research are excited to get hands on uh 2 30 90s would you recommend going with two highest end gaming ones in in case you want to stack them together and i can i guess it's really interesting because no motherboard right now properly supports putting two of these together yeah um i mean the the 1390s say they will cause a lot of headache you have power problems you have heating problems you have space problems and then the performance is not that great um they are cheaper than rtx titans and rtx titans are also no longer produced so um it's difficult to maybe find find them and maybe you can touch with them say again you stuck with the 1390s for the most part i guess for the research community uh yeah i mean i mean honestly if if you have like 20 80 ti's i will probably not upgrade uh only if you need the memory um so if you really choose a 1390 then um you need to do a couple of things first you need to upgrade your your power supply to the highest level you need to get a version that has a two slot design or the three slot design i saw some cooling numbers from this new design it's really good but it's just um it's just three slots large so you cannot run four gpus i mean if you only get two gpus totally totally great but if you get three gpus or four gpus it will be quite difficult to run that cool and right now it's unclear what the best option is i think with the cooling numbers probably the smartest option is to buy extenders and distribute them in the case but then you need to make sure to get very big case so you have enough space to spread them out and some people suggested like mining rig cases which are like open air and um other types of cases so no longer like real normal desktop cases and so i mean now that i'm talking as you already see there's so many problems so many problems yes and then there comes even more problems uh so in a lot of like u.s households and maybe also in other countries i'm sort of the power socket doesn't support that enough power to report to support uh one desktop with four 30 90s so you cannot even run it on a single socket with a single socket so you either need to get two power supplies spread them out or you need to power limit the gpu which is currently an untested solution on my blog post i show it is a possible solution it will probably only reduce your performance a little bit but it's experimental and so i'm curious when people build these sort of setups and they will report back and say yeah that works or hey that doesn't work so that information will be very valuable but right now yeah um as discussed there are so many issues uh so many uh things to figure out and so many things that can go wrong and so for most people i would say wait until people build these things and wait until people report back and say okay this works and this doesn't work and here's a problem and oh we need to figure that out once all of that is digested i think we know what you need to get a setup like that for for extenders it's kind of scary because you buy this really expensive graphic card and it's just hanging out on the side of your case at least that's how it appeared in the picture yeah i mean for me it's a bit disorganized i think if you can um if you put a bit more effort into it a bit more thinking and planning um you can get a better case there are some cases where you can nicely mount sort of um extenders and some extenders have like a base which you can nicely attach to a case and so you don't have these free floating gpus that sort of hang in all these cables i also didn't get extenders that were long enough i thought i had a long enough extender and i sort of measured but then um these things is bent they can be quite stiff and um i don't know you need to find the right spot on the case and sometimes there's just not enough space because all these power cables you know need to also think about that and so um i think if you do it carefully you can make it work um make it look nice and it will feel safe but if you do it like me then it's disorganized in chaos that's that's a very honest answer so for cases you've also mentioned uh and i i'm asking these questions because a lot of us have been discussing this constantly since it was announced so again these are all theoretical questions but cases you mentioned only help reduce three to four degrees celsius temperature if if you get a very good case with good air flow so which case should be really good again it's it's also size problem with the 30 90 because you need to make sure a you can fit the motherboard b you can fit two of these nicely which case should we look at yeah so i don't have any specific recommendation especially with the 1390 um so i think it's also a little bit longer than other gpus and i'm so a lot of cases only support like three gpus with double slots so you have a motherboard with four slots but then the last slot is so close to the case that you cannot mount a gpu there and it's very common uh at university of washington i've seen a lot of cases where this is the case it cannot mount the fourth gpu it's it's the same uh case with this same situation with this case as well as you can see there's a psu shroud right around here yeah and yeah this this is a 2080 ti but it's a two and a half slot card so literally it's useless beyond a single card i see i see um yeah and this is like very difficult to figure out um so no one has talked about this which which is really upset me because i was on this rabbit hole of just trying to find the answer i couldn't yeah that's right that's right um my strategy is sort of to look to do a google search for four gpu rigs and see okay they have enough space there they have enough space there and so then look at which cases they have and then sort of reverse engineer okay if i get this case i can fit your four gpus because they they could fit it so i can fit it and so i think that's sort of secure but there are few cases that support this um it's it's difficult to do and especially with the new gpus it's more uncertain because you cannot search for an image for that so um yeah you need to be very conservative look at the biggest case that you can find um look directly on the sort of where's the mother mother mounted how much space is there and sometimes uh makes sense to just step away from that just think about sort of a mining rig or even a server server sort of a case um and so yeah it's currently it's not clear what's the best solution i think time will tell but um be conservative in the case another uh theoretical question but uh if you'd like to answer this uh most of the motherboards some have a good spacing mostly the hyper expensive ones which force you to get a thread ripper which makes sense if you're getting two of uh 30 90s so how much space would you recommend if if someone is too scared to just use extenders do you know if one pci slot space between cards is helpful in general again we again it's a theoretical question because 39 days will heat up a lot more since they go up to 400 watts but yeah yeah so without extenders um it's difficult to say how gpus how the 39 or 30 80 or even 30 70 will perform when they're right next to each other so i think these cooling numbers that i saw they are really from a single gpu so another multi multi-gpu setup it seems that the nvidia standard design has both blower and a fan and the fans sort of can circulate through the other gpus so it seems that there should be some airflow but um it's it's i'm very skeptical these gpus have much more power they radiate much more heat so if they're very close to each other um what what can you expect if you have a certain spacing what can you expect in certain designs and so uh i would just recommend most people wait for other people to figure it out uh right now it's a bit risky i mean what i read is that uh the 30 90 sold out already so i guess most people have to wait anyway a little bit and so let other people figure that out first i just want to mention for the curious that uh older generation cards also have the semi-blower design not not the blue through design but at least i the gaming card i have it also is a hybrid offsorted blows hot air downwards and also through the back of the case so if you're really curious you can look at multiple cases of these ones where people are using multiple of these but ah yeah i didn't know about that that the design like that existed so that that's a very good data point so if you find uh some temperature numbers on people that have a regular like that that's probably a good indicator um it seems that the nvidia design is very sort of complex it seems to have a lot of more radiators and that sort of thing a lot more pipes um but um it's probably if you compare the standard sort of um third-party vendor gpus with sort of this design what what you have there the 4gpu setup and you look at the differences in temperature probably that is comparable what you can see sort of an enviro gpus um yeah but again i like you said and i i'm sorry for asking so many theoretical questions i guess the best thing is to wait another theoretical question that is also lurking in the community i promise this is the last one is blower uh edition graphic cards might not work at this wattage do you think that might be the case so people are thinking of waiting or if they shouldn't wait what are your thoughts on that uh yeah so so in general blower carts run hotter they have the advantage that they can get rid of the air but if you have an extender and like a founder edition gpu and a blower gpu the final edition will just be cooler it is just a better cooling system but not if there's no space uh between the gpus and so that's correct maybe blower designs will not suffice and so i guess maybe what in nvidia's design that they sort of had and took these things into account and they have both so maybe you need both and very sort of um streamlined design very complex cooling design but um yeah so [Music] i think their design with the extender is probably the best cooling solution uh and if we can just figure out a nice case and announce night nice extent that he can mount safely i think that that's probably the solution that most people would be happy about there's very little risk everything is stable and cooling will be great i hope so i i'm sure we can the audience can stay up by just following you on twitter because i i know you'll share it when you find out definitely yeah usually my last question uh is asking for best advice i've already asked that to you do you have any general thoughts for people otherwise based on the conversation we have any new perspectives on best advices for people just starting out today yeah that's that's a good question i mean we talked already like a lot about um how to sort of explore your career um and that you need to have different perspectives you have a different balance and uh you have a different balance for different people because they they do different things maybe some person exploits so much some person explores too much um in general it's difficult i feel like one bad advice that i often heard is just follow your passion passion is important for endurance passion is important to stick to something that's really difficult um but it's not the only thing you need to consider other things society wants you to do certain things and it just rewards certain things but not other things it's just society says oh i don't care about this i don't think this has value um and so then you also need to take account a little bit of that uh you shouldn't be naive and just follow your passion it needs to be a bit more balanced approach you need to look at different angles um and so i think my overall advice is to be open to different perspectives on your career and um yeah vary things a little bit over time um i think a little bit of variance is always good and um yeah just sort of reflect don't be a zombie that follows a path reflect every now and then to to um listen to yourself and say am i in a good spot do i like this is my career headed in a good good path um am i constricting myself too much do i run into a trap all these sort of kind of questions and so i think if you rounded up all these things um probably things work out quite well that's that's one of the best advices to end an interview on at least on this series before we end the call up if you'd like to mention the platforms radioactive for the audience to connect with you yeah i'm an actor from twitter and there you can follow me it's uh tim underscore that must my blog post is uh timdetmis.com and uh yeah um i said so if newer information becomes available or if i have new research i usually post on twitter small summary sometimes also i post like a small blog post so as i said i'll upload my gpu blog post if new information becomes available i think these are the best sources so to get in touch with me or to follow follow what i do to get in touch with me you can also email me me you find the email address on my blog and i'm also always happy to to have comments my blogs have quite a bit of comments and i'm also happy to discuss a couple of details so if you want to have a burning question just leave it on the appropriate blog post for for the lazy people there all they'll also be links in the show notes if you just want to click on that and if you don't want to search tim's theme tim thank you so much again for such an insightful interview and such such an amazing perspective on grad school and for answering a few of the birthing questions as well for the 30 series yeah thank you so much for having me [Music] thank you so much for listening to this episode if you enjoyed the show please be sure to give it a review or feel free to shoot me a message you can find all of the social media links in the description if you like the show please subscribe and tune in each week to chai time data science


## Tim Dettmers on Open-source AI, LMs, SWE Bench, Agents, Quantization, & Optimization

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0SVmBrbx2Rw

[Music] hey welcome back to interconnects uh this episode's an exciting one it's with Tim dmer Tim recently finished his PhD at the University of Washington now he's working at ai2 where I also work and in the next year he's going to start as a professor at carnegi melon University Tim is known for a ton of impactful contributions to the open Community uh whether it's Cura other quantization inference engines plenty of other NLP research and obviously the very popular quantization package bits and bites which is used extensively in the open ecosystem I'm really excited for this one we cover basic things like why open source may win out against closed models how we should think about agents kind of where scaling is going and where the future of AI is going and just a great tour from low-level details of Open Source all the way to forecasting the next five to 10 years so enjoy this conversation with Tim okay Tim Welcome to our bootleg inperson ai2 office recording studio we might get barged into but I'm just excited to pick your brain I mean we eat lunch together and we talk and it's obvious that we agree on a lot of things but you have really unique perspective on a lot of things and it challenges normal worldview so it's good to share it with people um I've got this rundown and we done definitely go off script but it's mostly on things that I find your takes fun on to prompt you and it's like kind of looking at we have a full llama 3 Suite from 1B to 405b when they release them it's like Mark Zuckerberg's like oh we're challenging the best models and we're making open- Source AGI and all this debatable stuff but like which of these models in the future do you think would be most useful or do they even need to go smaller yeah um yeah first of all thanks for having me here um so I think I mean if I look at the Chinese models actually they're like super competitive and super good um um I mean what I heard and I think they also publicly said that there will probably not be an open source llama 4 so um what you mean n law I don't think so um I think the next sort of scale of models they they just will not be open source I think we at the end of Open Source models now that do you think they're going to relas like they're still going to release like Mama 48b and stuff like this do you think um uh maybe maybe yeah I I think when I say sort of um they're not going to release that or we are the certif en of Open Source like we probably will not get models that are much much more capable we will not get uh GPD 5 level open source model this is like like I'm trying to it's funny because Wednesday is also my birthday and it's my Oney year anniversary to so I'm working this might get released later but I'm working on a post which is like Y open and this is what it feel feels like the whole open source economy the definitions are moving so fast and it's like mostly influenced by meta that is doing this thing for competitive reasons which is totally opposite of what we mean we're like why we are doing what we're doing and it's like that might be in some ways if meta stops releasing them good for the development of this area as a whole but also but like all the hit pieces of like open source AI is doomed so I don't like um yeah I mean on the other hand I feel like we don't need much better models um I think we're good to go we just need to work with them better yeah I mean this is my it's like preference data has been the thing in post training that we do none of and it's all the most of the open instruction data is like role playing and like these kind of not very specialized tasks and we see like alpaca Val and all these things are popular where we need a lot more kind of specifics on like what should people actually be doing with open models like um we can go right into this because I know you've been working on sweet bench a lot and like do you think this is just one example domain but like in the future do you think it'll be better to use open AI API models or those types of things or are people going to actually be training models on open ways to do this type of BU I think um I mean it's have sort of several Dimension this questions I believe open source can be competitive and might be actually just overtake the closed source apis uh because of flexibility because of ecosystem um um the opening I API is very specific it's very done done very well for what you needed to do uh but once you need to package it together um that's sort of where things end and with packaging together is like build more complicated pipelines incorporate fine tuning and incorporate steps where you make small adjustments to the model isn't this what a lot of AI products are doing like isn't this what perplexity is doing like I've talked to them a bit and I know other other startups that are smaller but it's like they do multiple model passes and then they just like put them all together and there's probably like one core there's the knowledge store but the core model I'm guessing it's some API model and it's like is that just CU it's cheap it's like why it was a later question it's like why do people build on apis and not open models my consensus is it's so cheap and it's so easy right now and you don't need the marginal gains like is that going to change so yeah I mean I think right now we don't have the open source infrastructure to really compete in terms of cost Effectiveness um I mean I I developed something um and that that seems to work work quite well and so um I think um if you look at the overall ecosystem and just inference I think you can be competitive but we need to create the open source infrastructure uh but once we have that I feel like fine tuning is to cumbersome open source will clearly win there um and wait let's be more specific what about using a fine-tuning API is cumbersome so I mean there are like privacy issues with uploading your data and so forth um but then it's also it's sort of a blackbox um if you do a little bit of fine tuning you quickly learn to how to do it yeah and it's like the opening ipis are like lauras right normally um I think it seems like that from what they're yeah and so I think that that's sort of definitely a thing um but yeah it's also if you have your process you get used to it and you know like how certain things look like if they're not working or if they're working you can build on top of that and you can take this experience share it with others with these sort of blackb apis you don't know what's under the hood you don't know if the system is changing and this is kind of like a philosophical question that I'm thinking about with our work it's like will the apis always need to do this like long taale of random implementation things because if fine tuning is so much more than instruction tuning now like is it almost do you think that'll be a reason that they lose if we get really good like preference tuning and RL infrastructure in the open it's like how is open AI you know like RL on your really specific prompts that you come up with for your business like it yeah I I'm I I don't know I I don't I think I think open eye also has the philosophy to have the business stuff let the businesses do that um and I think integrating those insights into their API is just a hopeless hopeless problem I don't think they have the expertise I don't think it would make sense for them from a cost perspective to really figure out what is needed by everyone how can we satisfy any everyone and but if you have an open source solution open source can develop all kinds of solutions then you say like oh I take this this is best for me and then oh I take this is do you see that happening cuz that's like a big part of the hugging face model is like you'll have model for specific things and I follow hugging face and I see it's most I see like mostly multilingual as the area where there's really specific things but how do we shift that into like this is the oh arithmetic is a terrible example but like that type of thing yeah I mean if when I talk to companies a lot of companies use Kora because it's coste efficient but then also they just want to pull some data from the data store fine tune it quickly and then deploy the model and let's compare it do an AB test or whatnot and um just this flexibility in the sort of you have Lago blocks that you combine then also the infrastructure that works with their infrastructure that they have mean in the end you need to deploy it you need to maintain it and um do you think the open source equivalent for Apple intelligence will end up being better because they can interface with more models so like apple intelligence is just Apple models and yeah they'll have to do work to bring in the open source but the open source won't help them uh yeah yeah so I think U actually the biggest sort of factor why I think Apple intelligence will not be the biggest thing is because it will be built for Apple products um like I'm using it and it's entertaining it's in beta and it's like oh this notification summary is entertaining it can generate tables yeah but like their iteration speed just seems like it's going to be so slow yeah and it will be for their products like I think we are still at a point where it's unclear what people want to use AI systems for um a lot of prototyping a lot of demos but not so many points that like yeah we really increase productivity um often it's more engineered solutions that increased productivity um but do you think sent is a good example so um yeah I think so I think um so so I think a big problem with benchmarks is they're so saturated that it's unclear if a improved performance on MML or not translate to real world performance the nice thing about speed bench is like you know if you improve on it it has realc sort of implications in the real world like if you improve a couple percent that's what does a couple percent actually mean so a couple percent is like a couple more um working test cases on a GitHub issue that's what it means right yeah yeah is there a fine gred way to think about sent yeah so you can think about sort of General difficulty and some bug fixes so super hard on sweet bench and um then there's just a collection of sort of easy things and sort of depending on that you can quickly he'll climb and then you sit hit certain certain it's like is it like almost levels it's like you do all the easy ones you do the medium ones I think right now it's still unclear but that's what it feels like to me um what do you think these companies that are raising tons of money to Max AR Max on swe vent or doing um so from from what I see from my work is that the most important thing on on speed bench is to get the workflow right how you basically use your model and that's so different than modeling like everyone thinks like everyone thinks about AI ventx as like the modeling problem but that's why it's like we need I think this will be a big focus in 2025 and I want to learn about it and it's like what does it mean for an evaluation to not be about modeling uh that's right that's right um I think I think it will be difficult to disentangle uh in the future like our tasks get more complicated because they're too saturated so we need complicated tasks but complicated tasks you can't just like take a complicated task throw it at a model that will not be possible like you need to design things around it but then the entire system needs to be almost seems like only base model evaluation is easy cuz we're having discussions for like reward bench V2 and there's a lot of new work on evaluating reward models and we see a trend where like what we did was accuracy so like does your reward model agree with these pairs people aref it's veryy arent to you need something that correlates with something like chapot Arena but there's so many steps in that chain you have to train your reward model you have to have your evaluation data you have to evaluate on humans and the other thing is like accuracy and it's kind of constrainted and I think in s Ben's case to make it very academic you would probably need to have multiple facets yeah which is like how does it handle this type of information how and then you will see the final score of like putting it all together yeah so yeah I I think evaluation is just a super hard problem um I think for me um so so so personally I use Claud quite a bit and if I look at the benchmarks numbers GPT 40 looks quite good but when I use it it's like no CLA is just much better and um what is most of the code you're writing like I know some of the tools you're writing it's just like normal pie torch or wrappers of things yeah actually don't use um I found AI models pretty useless for code so I'm I'm not using them much for code but for what are you using it for I'm mostly writing stuff thinking about stuff um sort of double cheing my my thoughts um finding critical feedback um yeah and a lot of you and Derk are the people that like it's not good enough for code the people that just get so much done and You' spent time doing enough code where it just not it's not going to help it's not going to help with Cuda kernels it's like you've gone so deep on different coding that you just don't need it I mean sometimes if you need to write a lot of boiler plate it can be useful um and also to sort of I don't know one time I I thought like hey this problem must be possible with with like these models and I I actually tried both claw GPT 40 and it's like it's it's just the code appears to be good and it's sort of sensible but then if you look at the details makes absolutely no sense and it's sort of it's just more work to disentangle the code into something that's good that you can build on so I don't know my thinking is like if the code doesn't require much expertise and you have an existing system that you extend good if you want to have sort of qu system the built on not good enough if you have requires deep expertise also not good yeah it's like you could write no offense the huging face Transformers ecosystem like you could probably write another model pretty easily and it's like an add-on yeah but writing the core abstraction for like a training architecture is really hard yeah I think that makes sense I mean models can write it but then you will lose so much time in the future when you need to get back to change something maintain it or the maintenance thing choices are really bad for design I mean like I've definitely seen code that I've written that I am blown away that cloud solves it but then later I'm like well that was a minor issue it's like the random doubling batch size or something that I didn't know was in it so it's it's a net ad for me and I still use it I mean I know I'm not like I'm not as an engineer as a lot of people I work with so I'm like I'm happy to have something that normalizes the distribution so like what is happening is probably like the best coders are still better and then the people that weren't as good are getting pulled up so like the Delta is a nice thing but you you still have probably a head wve but like I can just do a lot of stuff that I couldn't do so so I see it myself when I write in languages that I don't really know or I don't know it just I I understand quickly things I make quick progress and probably there all the underlying issues that I um just said but I don't Rec I don't see them because I'm unfamiliar with the issues in those language or with a particular set of piece of software uh yeah okay um Switching gears you're from one hat as an engineer to your hat as an academic it's like um it's easy as well resourced academics to choose the right problems to work on but what should people with various amounts of compute be doing to try to contribute either to this open ecosystem and write good code or just like fundamental research and language models like do you have a few things you recommend yeah I think it's it's a lot about Trends so um I view it often from sort of um there are if you want to get good AI systems there are tiny a lot of tiny factors sort of multipliers and you can sort of if you have a low multiplier it's very much worth to sort of scale it up and just improve the overall product of all these small factors and if I look what do you mean by multiplier so do you mean like multiple models in the system or what you can figure out better architecture or better attention or better scaling so it's like what people at big companies call like flop efficiency or something or quantization but they're they're diminishing returns and at some point it's like yeah if you improve it a little bit more it's not making a difference and so you should look for what is making a difference and I mean it gets harder if you don't have the Computer Resources but I think that's sort of first Factor um I see a lot of people when they get computer resources are like w I got all these gpus and then they work on problems require a lot of G put some numbers on it as academics like um a fun thing is like how many gpus does udub have we could sh like we ai2 is known we have this like thousand h100 cluster that's growing a bit and a long tail of other gpus and some TPU access like that's more than most academics and how many does like something like udub have I mean udub has around 600 gpus um probably for more people as what I'm guess it feels actually like less it depends okay and so um actually sort of helped sort of design the cluster and has a sort of the system where um sort of pis by gpus and then their students can use those gpus but then there's a free queue where everybody can get idle gpus and so I as a student it's a great system where it's like the rich rich professors help pull up everyone else yeah yeah and um I mean I I always use idle q and I could get like 100 200 gpus no problem most of the time and so I do feel like this Compares it other well off like CMU Berkeley Stanford MIT like do they have similar access I I thought so H but when I was on the job market I could see that very few institu actually have good GPU systems this is something that's like with the PO talking the policy and the government it's like if you can assume the government can spend 1 to3 billion on AI it's like a lot of people are like let's just buy a lot of gpus but it's almost like it's you're just going to get caught in the fact that you buy gpus that you can't utilize if you just spend the money on it so it seems like you dub did well and I'm guessing other institutions have gpus that like can't quite work for the whole Community as well yeah and I mean there there multiple one one issue that I often hear academics are like oh we have money let's buy gpus and then they buy the gpus and then figure out oh my storage is too slow and I can't use the gpus because my storage is not working well well oh my networking is not working well or hey my queuing system is so designed ai2 Beaker team should be more open about the things we're solving and how we make those decisions like would that help academics um I think I think the software is not necessarily the problem like you can use slum but it's like how we're deciding with vendors even cuz AI 2's gpus aren't just from like we there's a decision process between all these big clouds medium clouds yeah I mean it's complicated um it's sort of so so I mean what I can say there certain Cloud providers said are known for having reliable networking they have the Nvidia sack which is much user to integrate in software It's just tough that it's often like a IT department that's going to make these decisions um I don't know I don't know I'm just trying to learn about like the academic sphere yeah and what we could say to people that are like I have X amount of gpus yeah and I generally think that it's like the amount of gpus that you need multiplied like if you multiply a training run the amount of gpus you need to do a training run in a amount of time that gives you feedback faster so normally like for non- pre-training things it's like you want your experiment to be like order of an hour is like you can do it really fast order of day or two it's like it's still good and then like once you go beyond a week it's like hard to mentally string them together so it's like I'm guessing there's a lot of people that can do these experiments but they do them sequentially because they don't have enough gpus and it's like how do you like what is the GPU like what is the trade-off that people can make to try to scope their problems so uh mean one thing how I approached my research in general was I get a baseline that is informative and runs in four GPU hours and so if you have that um and you you also need to check if this sort of extrapolates and most of the time it doesn't but it gives you a good correlation so you know if you're right then you know like maybe I could be right but if you're wrong you definitely know you're wrong and so you can get a quick result um and see if ideas make sense once you're on this setup you just you don't want to run an experiment and then experiment you run like a hundreds at a time then another 100 and another 100 you get evidence very quickly and then you know like okay this is this and this I've definitely heard this from professors research managers that the people who Stand Out are the ones that can mentally run the most experiments in parallel and keep track of them I think I think that makes sense I mean how do you cure how do you select or curate for that skill oh um like if you're going to advise a student it's like how do you get them to set up their life so that that is like a doable play um I mean I I have done it and I feel like you need a certain mental model to get into sort of this mindset and really I mean basically what you just described that if you know that's a go goal you can optimize for that but most people think like the goal is something different um and then you're not optimizing for that so um the thing is for example you can spend two weeks on infrastructure then run a lot of experiments or you can say like no no I get my need need to get my experiments going then quickly run an experiment another experiment another experiment for my experience is always more efficient to First build the infrastructure and then just just gives you this sort of peace of mind you can think more clearly and then run things what are other are there other popular Frameworks you've released other than qora that are like infrastructure that I just don't know about I mean like B and bites I know about I associate that with Cur but how much is it more than that uh yeah I mean there is some Library that's is called it's like GPU scheduler that I built over my PhD um and people use weights and biases I think it really some back um weights and bias really bad for I mean if if I run a th experiments no no hope to analyze and so what I developed what this system is it's sort off does a grid search in a way where you get the most information with the least experiments and then it does an analis like a basion optimization thing or is it just a it's a grid surge algorithm is sort of a certain grid search job which um so so what you can do is basically an interval search so it's not random search and then what you can do is combine different hyper parameters in different settings so um um in that way um you basically if you want to evaluate multiple hyper parameters then you have for each hyper parameter only one experiment but you have for all different kinds of combinations with the particular hyper parameter maybe it doesn't experiments or more and so so that isolates as a variance and so what you can do with my tool is basically give a group variance for that hyperparameter based on all other hyp that makes sense and then you can see what matters what is your background in I should have asked earlier like before your PhD what were you doing yeah I I worked a little bit in automation industry for three years um studied a little B psychology robotics or what type of automation uh that was Factory Automation and mostly food factories a lot of factories um like what are you actually doing so so I mean there are different parts of sort of uh Factory automation sort of what I specialize in sort of integrating systems integrating their Data Systems and then um routing data uh making data accessible to sort of a person that controls all machines or to management that sort of gets aggregated reports on performance um yeah I'm trying to understand why infrastructure might not be prioritized as much because it seems like when you have very good infrastructure you can approach approach your AI research in a much more scientific way yeah and is it just the same Rat Race incentives that are kind of making people not prioritize it um this is a good question I I I don't yeah I don't quite know myself I think I think if I think about I mean so when I started in my PhD and I think about software engineering my software engineering engineering skills went down because I was in this mindset of like just producing an experiment to get a result and that's often the fastest way to move forward because you just need a negative result to reject an idea so you quickly want to get that negative result and so um with this mindset you have sort of the mindset of the throwaway software and you just want to build the software and throw it away like all of my it's like all of my PhD was built on this except for the one paper that was like a tool it's like why is this the it's like why is this the case and it's only only at ai2 that I feel like I've start I mean like at hugging face I learned a lot more about Open Source software which is very fun to like be on the ground floor of when like diffusers is happening and it's like you do these opinionated things to make your users lives the easiest and then some of the things are about making your life easier which is hugging Face's audience is different than the researcher audience like the hugging face audience is we have a ton of users we need to make their lives easy for what their use case is and the researcher is I have one to three users and I need to make this very good for a long time frame yeah which is like a very specific type of Open Source software and it's like open instruct our fine tuning libraries like this where it's we didn't have it package like pip installable for like eight months because we used Docker so is easy to load the docker image and then edit your files but if you had pip install it added a whole bunch of steps on it it's like this is like really nice tooling but it's like the opposite from what TRL looks like at hugging face and it's like having more examples for people to understand academic tooling seems cool and I'm wondering like oh what is how does like open it is open ai's research tooling tied to their deployment tooling or is there offense that it goes over um I mean as as far as as I I heard um there's definitely quite some um difference there's also some overlap I mean if somebody builds eff ficient tooling you can reuse it but for certain problems you need certain tooling uh What uh also and colleague um said also working in a frontier lab is that basically every experiment is an infrastructure problem um if you work at a certain scale and so you just first need to engineer the infrastructure to run that experiment and it how you describe it sounds a little bit like um um sometimes infrastructure is too specific to generalize so you probably have your Productions uh sort of infrastructure you have like sort of experimentation infrastructure and then you have sort of small sort of branches that Branch off of it that you use for a small project or so but you probably need to work on it a little bit to get something started yeah um it's like is this like a hard question it's like if your lab only has a few A1 100s and h100s is the best bet to not do language model set and do something that's longer term um so I think you can do really good research on very little compute um in language models I mean you shouldn't pre-train language models um certain problems need a certain amount of compute um I what I see for example on sweet bench you need enough compute for inference and um that's significant um but also certain problems on sweet bench you can you do with L compute and so I think uh constraints actually give you sort of more creativity um and so um I was I was at meta um parttime for like two years and I had access I could run things on like 500 gpus amount of experiments I could run when I was a Facebook intern was absolutely hilarious they had set up a whole new cluster and the most of fair like didn't know how to use it yet probably because they didn't know to use slurm and some software engineer was like here you can use it and I could use like 300 concurrent gpus in like 2019 as an intern like what I was just silly yeah but yeah for me it was I had access to all the G use and I worked on problems that required a lot of compute but I didn't make good progress and then at some point so this steal with with meta was for 2 years then I went back to the University of Washington had much less compute but I made much more progress because I know like oh I can't work on these expensive problems I really need to think about what problem I should work on and what I can use with my resources and that I think that made my research actually better so are you still I mean your job talk everyone hyped it up about your story about using laptops and everyone's computer like do you think that's going to be the case in the next few years yeah definitely so so laptop's over there I would hold up ridiculous bricks that we all get um no I think our laptops will be uh powerful enough to run mean not probably not develop but run uh the AI that we probably want to use in everyday life um yeah and I mean as I said there sort of this question will open source and close Source how they will compete I think open source will win actually over time okay let let us dig into this like there's two things like why will open source actually win I think we've talked about scaling a bit here I've kind of put my like I feel like I'm a scaling moderate where I'm like yes the loss will go down but you're really putting yourself into Financial you're making a financial bet which is which okay like open AI raises so much money all these companies raise money it gets funneled through tsmc we get new process nodes like we're going to keep these process nodes forever we're going to be able to make better computers so it's nice in some ways that they're doing this but the Financial Risk seems extreme so that's my yes are you a a Bubble Buster like you think this is all going to just blow up I think a lot of AI startups will blow up I'll say the like things that can be controversial first and you can fill them in like so many startups are going to go belly up because that'll hit them first and Google's fine yeah I mean I I think probably we follow a similar pattern to the com boom so we would grow more more more probably a couple more years and then 95% of companies will fail and but then the remaining companies will probably AI I think AI will have a major impact and so I don't think AI will not work but it's I don't think we have what we need right now if you look at open AI they did cool things but they really failed at Landing a product besides chat GPT chat GPT is a huge land but it's like unintentional land yeah H um yeah and so I don't know um compared to the cost might still work out for them but it's do you still think AI is like the most transformative technology of our time or do you think that it's just like slightly additive to everything that was happening in the internet um I think it would be quite transformative it's unclear how exactly I mean people debate that s about the internet like if you look at social media and you say like is that it um you look at the value created like and sort of um I I think I think digitalization sort of if you look sort of economic scale was just really important um part of my view is like what would be the case if like recommender systems were all built on open source infrastructure and I think language models are more culturally Salient because people talk to them in text now people talk to them in voice yeah and that almost just feels like a stronger imperative because all the negative effects can go way deeper it's almost like the what is it the stupid food chain thing where you have toxins and like the the little fish don't get that affected by the toxins but all the whales die and it's like we're just getting the really really concentrated technology which is like that's why I don't want it to be screwed up but yeah do like do you think about these things um I mean I I wonder how in what way AI will sort of impact Society um I mean if you look at social media I think most people would say it hasn't been entirely positive and so um I think with AI is like the question where will be sort of good parts where do bad parts I think overall we see good parts in terms of um it's it's helpful uh to some degree um it gets better developer developer productivity and information economy productivity is already way higher which is like obviously and it's it's our most Val it's the economy that drives the most value in the world it's just so boring if all that happens is Google Apple meta get three times as big and that's the end of the day yeah yeah I mean if you look at the global economy that's that's still not not that major um I mean uh yeah if you look in the US um yes um I mean there's some I was quite skeptical about economic growth through AI if you look at the global data it doesn't show but um we see the first time since long time actually a nonlinear increase in productivity growth and oh really is this recent or from what no pretty recent like since since uh the last two quarters I think and it's like oh this this hav haven't happened since since the sort of um internet Revolution and it's like I expect this stuff to take like 10 years like this is the time scale that we need to look on because I think it's less buy more this is probably similar I buy more into we need to figure out how to use this then scaling is going to uh but with computers was the same I mean computers didn't make us more productive in the beginning and it took like 20 years and so when do you document the start of computers like when is the PC I I I think I think the start was like IBM and having computers and businesses and so um you could think do things faster that's why people bought these machines but productivity grows you didn't even see it with sort of early Windows where computers became more widespread it only started um later and so um yeah we already seen or I mean it's still unclear if the growth that we're seeing is due to AI H it's it seems that it could be and part of it feels like a self-fulfilling procy where we have ai but we also have like weo and we have SpaceX like Tesla like these are not AI things but it's all getting conglom together yeah yeah I mean the question is like what what do you call AI if you just say AI is just big models trained on lots of data that are very expensive um I mean weo is like big AI system that's complicated it also has expensive models have you read in wayo uh no actually it was in San Francisco I miss you've got to do it the next time you're it's like immediately it's like this is the future it's like I will pay 20 well 20% honestly I pay a bigger margin to Uber and like it's just flat out way better and I I just encourage everyone to do it it's like yeah it's much more visceral than AI like AI has these aha moments and I was hoping that the AI talking to AI would feel more like this but talking to it I'm kind of like like that's that's kind of not that's not good not good it was like I was hoping I would be able to say something interesting about it but it's like tattoo BT and just information processing is just so much more straightforward I'm curious what uh what what a a model so usually using GT4 CLA or yeah it's mostly these I if I'm doing technical coding it's quad I use chat gbt for like information changing a matrix from markdown to latch or grabbing it in converting it and it's just a bit better I like don't use oan as all which is my next thing is like o1 is a perfect example of this product problem where from a technical perspective I'm like this is the most interesting thing to happen for the year like open ey on to me like just so interesting that you could get this extremely different behavior from an obviously different model training stack but it's like we don't know what to use it for yeah yeah I mean I'm I I yeah 01 I'm I'm not a Believer um so many people work on reasoning I think it's a really bad research Direction um um I don't think reasoning is really important um like okay in humans reasoning is one thing that set us also apart from other animals but if you look at neuroscience and reasoning you would often sort of um categorize as working memory you store information manipulate that information in your temporary storage and then with that you solve problems and most of the problems you can't solve with working memory um but it's also very weakly correlated with intelligence um you can take me as an example I'm dyslexic dyslexics are known to having extremely poor um working memory capacity and function uh I'm the bottom 5% in working memory for what are the things that people use working memory for so like let's get make it more concrete so uh basically any conscious processing okay so like holding numbers in your head doing that yeah but also holding this conversation in your head um I don't know um if you plan already the next question or where do you go with this conversation it's all intuitive I like I do way less prep than a lot of people do because i' it's like part of the brand being open is like I'm trying to just bring where I am and transparent and that's like I'm writing is not that edited it's just like this is where we at and I will try to make it as clear as possible and I want to it's like I want to bring people in and just kind of see where it goes but otherwise it's like so much work so so it sounds like yeah there's so much work part that requires working memory but if it feels like sort of flowing and natural and you use your sort of intuition no no reasoning required that's it's like the working memory is the 30 page paper for two Lo three that I need to extract out of my brain and put into L Tech that's the working memory which I definitely used but that Mak sense so so so the models don't do this like that's like yeah so so if you look at all1 it does reasoning perfectly it it it sort of reminds me of what I what I read in the psychology Neuroscience literature it's just doing exactly this process that people would describe as reasoning but it's not working because reasoning is not that important and so I think people are like oh if we have reasoning we have human intelligence no we don't have the think are more important I'm just mostly interested it because it's an interesting Behavior like I have no idea what what it be used for um I've been recently thinking that 01 models are similar as a proof of point to like a text information store language model where you have a lot fewer parameters and you're just doing the processing on an information store I wish more people would talk about this cuz like o is ow mini is very small and the model is doing the reasoning but it's like they need to do that training thing on a giant information store and they have a perfectly up todate model with their training is like that almost seems like a better product than what they have served for o1 uh yeah yeah I mean I bet that would be also even more difficult than what they have now but um so if I think about the brain um it's actually a has sort of longterm memory component a retrieval component than a working memory component if you look at the sort of Neuroscience literature they often like sort of combined U because that's what you need in order to reason so working memory is the most important part but you need to load stuff in the working memory and for that you need to retrieve and there's sort of a hierarchy that goes from short-term memory to sort of a sort of a hash table and then to your cortex to then retrieve and basically Loop it back into working memory and that's just required and there two basically stores of working memory one is sort of for execution memory one is for symbolic memory and planning and so you need to basically populate these stores in order to reason but um yeah you need a retrieval model for that interesting yeah okay I don't even have a response but I appreciate like this is why it's like products like perplexity makes sense because they they're I mean they are products yeah and they have a long way to go as a business and mostly hinges on figuring out advertising to be honest like a lot of these companies hinge on figuring out advertising for chat models but it's like a nice analog to think about multiple language model passes which is eventually where the IND where Academia will go is just a hard thing it's like we're just figuring out language model evaluation there's all these things and then we're going and then we're making it into this composite thing yeah which is hard yeah no I think it will be like composite systems like complex systems unclear what form and shape they take I think we have from that benchmarking is hugely important we need to figure out what we measure we need to figure out what people care about like uh there's a reason why open AI cannot a product that makes sense do academics need to work on problems that people actually care about or is it fine like we can just make a vows that show interesting Behavior yeah I mean there's sort of the academic direction of working on problems to find knowledge and then spread the knowledge but it's more satisfying to find knowledge that is helpful for people and for things to be helpful they need to be somewhat grounded in something that matters to people that is helpful to people and with that you need to understand what they need and um if if you understand the needs and wants then actually what systems would fulfill these needs and wants and then you have something that you can evaluate that has this sort of path from like I create knowledge which is useful and if you just create knowledge that might later be useful I mean there are a lot of examples in like math where have mathematicians say like oh this will not be useful and then it's like super useful but I mean if we look for benefits in the near future AI is moving fast then it needs to be grounded somewhat in what people care about yeah I mean I agree I think a lot of think a lot of why I work here is just like I want to do basic things that people can build on it's like being in at the foundation level where you're building these models is something different that requires more re research and like resources is actually what I meant to say I kind of stumbled um and then it could going back to our academic conversation it almost seems like a good thing to do is like to be imaginative on what you can use these for yeah and then build best cases build best practices recommendations examples and storytelling like and then you start to build evaluations and stuff like this yeah yeah I wish people would be a little bit more creative I mean it feels like uh a lot of researchers sort of are sort of like Engineers they're like oh this is a problem like I can book your a calender appointment or like I can summarize your email it's not really problems it's a you need to be in a privileged position to where Boring things are impactful which is like ai2 we are the only people that can tell you everything and we have enough gpus to do something but like unless you're on the same order of magnitude as somebody with the same thing you have to be doing something different yeah yeah I think there's a lot of room for different things I don't know I don't know what the problem is I think it's yeah um probably thinking like oh uh people and laughs and they figured everything out it's a simple trade-off it's like things are hot now you want to make your if if you it's hard to make your name when things are not hot when things are hot it is easier like a prepos a presumption so like what the thing to do is you try to latch onto something that is obviously going exponential and therefore a lot of people try to do it where it's like I understand it it's just like taking risk and be being like cogn and and understanding of like what the what it will feel like to do something new is hard is like what and I like I don't have a lot of advice for people it's just like that is what it will feel like it will feel weird and you'll probably get like oh why are you doing that a lot of people yeah yeah I think I think that's the right perspective um it's just you need to go with things at growing but then we off a little bit sort of left or right but it's sort of unclear when to do that when is right and that sort of thing I I think it's a also a bit thing like um I don't know I I see a lot of people following the frontier Labs but when I hear from the frontier Labs nobody has a clue what's going on among them like they're just building stuff like we do they they they have no clue they build one stone thing at a time and things break together and then they try again and um they have no good explanations for things um they're just more compute um they have good people people um they have good tal density and compute density which are like there's so there's it's green fields when you have both of those yeah yeah okay I wanted to ask your opinion on some random technical things what do you think of instruction tuning versus rhf um not not really an opinion on that um I think we can we can go a long long way with synthetic data and so if I say how much human data I think human data is very precious and we need it but we probably can get away with less that is more targeted more high quality yeah it's very hard to measure this I think yeah the synthetic data is almost a more interesting point I think it's like John Schulman said this which is like if thinking about preferences it's like humans are high noise low bias and AI is high bias low noise and we don't know what the bias and the noise are but we know like synthetic data is the future in most things but it's like we don't know these fundamental things which is like what actually are they and I'm just like well if someone could present me with a really compelling research paper there that will be like seminal work yeah I think that's that's exactly the problem um and I think you say right we basically have no clue to our project but it's not that we're building on quicksand like the synthetic data is not quicksand because it's a real thing but it's like if we can understand the core principles of it then you can kind of use it more precisely and know when you need to have human verification yeah yeah so so I think there are some clear patterns that you can use synthetic data to sort of quickly figure out if your model is wrong but it's just very difficult to figure out if your model is right and probably for that you need human data this sort of my intuition and a lot of and a lot of sort of problems we currently are not verifying if our models are wrong which proba we could probably do easily with something people in training are trying to do it more like a lot of the compute from rhf using being more yeah is by filtering and verification yeah yeah and a thing that we're starting to scratch with two Lo 3 is is like training on specific test cases for our model so essentially if you have prompts where you can verify the answer which almost seems like something that might it's like we're doing it for very general capabilities like math instruction following the valves that everyone knows but it's like what if RL training on test cases becomes something that works for every type of example and then it just just a matter of like you need to have verifiable prompts yeah which is something that I could see RL being used for specialization for that because the reward signal is nice yeah it's it's just a little bit of supervision it let's it's essentially if the model can generate the answer but not reliably it will increase the reliability of it if the model cannot generate it you can't train it with RL to just generate it it's just going to be giberish yeah yeah that that makes total sense to me I think yeah this overall direction makes a lot of sense you want to use synthetic data it's so early it's just early the RL stuff compared to DPO is interesting because it's generating different types of synthetic data yeah and in some ways I feel like the DPO thing was a good distraction where it's like you need DPO to make it people make thousands of people realize they can do research on alignment uh but also because everyone is going to come in and do this easy thing it therefore like over indexes what the research Community is doing on this thing that has a that isn't the whole field yeah yeah I mean the the research Community sometimes a little bit slow to S of um change the direction but I feel like with science in general it can be slow but it's pretty reliable over time I think yeah we figure things out it's like a genetic process it's I it's just kind of How It's like the I describe it as like the march of progress It's like things just there's a lot of noise and it's like a lot of the scooping these days it's like just validating results I think almost any unless you're like extremely brilliant almost any problem is going to be happening in some other Lab at the same time because of the level of Interest which is why I recommend people to like invest in just being really good at getting your paper story and make it you have First Impressions to your research like you have to capture the person that's thinking about looking at your work that's right which is not what we are often trained yeah okay from Instructions also model merging I think people finally accept that it is a crucial thing like what is what was your first exposure to this I think I don't remember the title of the paper off the top of my head but like how did you become tuned into model merging so yeah I mean uh we had a paper Branch Train merge and there the key Insight was that um if you you so you want to train experts in this case and you want to train them on different data and the key inside was like if you train the experts on different data then you try to merge them back together sort of merge the expertise into one model it doesn't really work and the inside was that okay if you start out with just the single General sort of expert train on all of the data just for a little bit then um the optimization landscap settles down mathematically it's sort of the spectrum of Hassen um settles into a sort of Subspace and so most of the optimization happens only sort of an tiny uh Subspace in in sort of the overall parameter space of the model and how you can visualize it is like the model first doesn't know what it's doing and then it goes down lost Canyon yeah and once it's there it changes very little and once it's there then you might uh so so once you train and this only takes like 5% of the training time or sometimes even less and and after that you can take this General expert and train on all kinds of different specialized data sets and so if you do that then in the beginning you go down the canyon and once you're on the canyon and you specialize you Branch off a little bit in either direction if you train on different data sets but you're still in the same local neighborhood so now you can linearly interpolate and basically capture all the expertise gained from all the expert models uh and just merge them together linearly or with a weighted average and is this ultimately that like the parameters are capturing different things it's like time for me to ask dumb questions about model merging and it's like we're just training these a little bit so then like different parameters learn all of it and then merging it together you just keep a bunch of it uh that's right yeah I mean sort of in the end I mean all of that there these sort of optimization directions and sort of a Subspace it's not directly mapped onto axes so it's not like uh you optimizing in the I don't know a certain direction like math and it's just this one direction or a set of directions It's like because it's not axis aligns probably all the parameters but all the parameters are sort of pushed in a certain geometric Direction and so um you have the same for sort of another sort of concept and then um yeah if you push sort of both then you can sort of merge them back together do you think this has consequences on things that we don't measure for the model uh like is this in making the model slightly more specific at at all of these things like it probably is like there's no free lunch and stuff um yes so I think I think um probably if you over parameterized um um and I think the biggest thing is if you optimize multiple Direction and there is competition then uh the the structure needs to be in a way where there's basically no slack like every parameter is used and the value the correct value is important and so what we see from quantization is the longer you train the more data you use per parameter the more difficult quation gets and so this is a similar thinking that if you really over if you really overtrain your model it will be more difficult to merge and preserve all the capabilities so merging might work better at bigger models assuming that we don't have that much more data uh that's right yeah if you train on less data per parameter my expectation was merging Works a little better you think knowledge distillation is similar it's like merging became popular recently it seems like maybe it's like the one to 100b range is the magic range where merging starts working is knowledge distillation happen to be similar so so I mean for that we probably need to talk a little about what these optimization Landscapes yeah I don't really know what knowledge distill like knowledge distillation is a reweighting of the log props in my brain which is probably a simplification yeah yeah so so if you think about normal neuron Network optimization there's quite good literature there actually really like um that um basically studies the Dynamics of the hessan uh the spectrum of the hessan over time and so this is basically a study of the local curvature in the optimization space so how quickly you change directions in the optimization space hessan is like a matrix second derivative right yeah you can see yeah you can see it making sure I remember my FAL so the the visualization that you can have is you're like um going down a hill seeing and then you're going down a track and then suddenly the track bends and then bends again that's that's basically the curvature changing yeah and you need to adjust the track to go down the hill and so and not along the hill or something like that and so um you basically study these changes in sort of curvature and um so what has been shown is that if you have a small data set for example in computer vision you have like ca 10 10 classes 10 labels uh or UFC for 100 100 labels then there are as many sort of primary directions as labels so what you basically learn is uh one one feature one feature for one uh label if if you go to image net thousand classes then it's no longer this one to one mapping and that's also why the lottery ticket hypothesis breaks down it's like from your initialization it's not clear where these dimensions are and how to optimize them so you have much more Dimensions than the thousand but not that much more and for language models just explodes in sort of complexity but this basically spans this optimization landscape and how you can think about it is how it is evolving over time and we also have some evidence for that is for example just to give you an example visual examples like if you have a cat and a dog feature these are pretty separate but now if the model realizes hey they're different dog breeds and hey they're different cat breeds then um it's sort of a branching off a feature so you have this tree of hierarchic features if you want to learn new one you need to Branch off and that's mostly because if you have random initialized neur Network and you want to find an optimization path from basically the outputs to the inputs um it's almost impossible to learn um a new connection through random weights but is very easy to expand expand the path that you're already on the feature that you're already on with some um sort of uh slight modification of your existing feature so the the dark label becomes this almost like why the recurrent or like what is the word for like that you have you essentially in the model you have this input goes around and the input goes through the features and it's like the going having the go around is nice because you have to learn like a Delta on it and you just add it rather than the whole thing that's right that's right so like this is what if you listen this is like chaining podcast but like on the dark C podcast with anthropic or some other anthropic media they talk about this which is like this is why it's like really nice for the models learning because it's just a simpler space yeah there's a nice paper about this that studied this is um I think it's called rest Nets do um it iterative refinement on features written by some colleagues like and um yeah but so that is a natural way how features are learned but if which is entirely unclear what happens if you have a real Network that gives you sort of a distribution so it's not like here's some pattern that you need to learn it's like here's a distribution that you need to learn and it's already very fine grain so probably in this distribution you already have the different dog breeds and you get it from the beginning so you don't need to learn the dog and then the dog breeds you can learn all the dog breeds from the beginning you can set up the optimization landscape so that you learn these features and there might be a big benefit to learn a hierarchy but there might also be a big benefit to set this hierarchy up this is almost like knowledge distillation models are going to be different they're different numerically in ways that we don't exp in our we see this Asma 2 is not to with llama 3 in terms of post training recipes it's like in our work where like Gemma is a strong model but we just don't know like how it maintains inform like how if mlu will drop more all these things just because it's a different space yeah yeah I mean I'm curious like um if you can say a little bit more about about your experience there um so I mean from my understanding I haven't haven't worked for much Gemma or use it but what I see from the community it has sort of very good Benchmark numbers but when people use it then something feels off sometimes works really well but then there's some kind of Gap that like why can't it do that or I mostly think that it I mostly hear similar things that's like finicky to train yeah and that has now self-fulfilled into where we select our models and like how we deprioritize it because we're just not confident in our model our recipe translating and it's like therefore it's a risk to be like we launch with Gemma but we don't actually we're not as confident in how to explore there that that makes so it's not it's not subst like it's just like I mean this is something an academic do like yeah what is like like what are the what are the best practices between Gemma 9B and llama AP like like what of the differences that's right that's right that's for example good a good question to explore if you don't have much computer right yeah um the last one of these architecture or method series is recurrent like State space models I find state space models cuz the math brings me all the way back to my e linear systems days but I don't know if that translates to how the neural Nets actually learned because they have like the observability Matrix and stuff in the math which is nice like do you see that that is that like sub substantially more is it just extremely different and we're just going to see um I I don't think it's that much different from recurr NE networks um and I think it's not about the computation about the learning patterns um and uh I am currently not super convinced um I worked on architectures for like two years a matter uh all my projects failed because nothing really beat Transformers yeah um and sometimes I see papers where people present ideas that I worked on and I know like yeah this will not work um I didn't work on St based models so but and a colleague asked me like hey you said like you don't believe in sa models like can you look at this plot and tell me like what what doesn't look good here and I look at this plot and I'm like uh I don't know it's like I have this feeling if I see this plot and I looked at so many plots that yeah these Trends don't look good and so I can't point a finger to it uh but I think at the certain point it's just transformers will still be better and that's what we're going to use that's my my like um all Branch all extend it's like oh yeah chbt will know to route to a state space model if it's a 10 billion length document and it'll be like 0.1% of queries into chat gbt it's like how many Google p queries do you have where you paste in a PDF like not that many so that's kind of like they there will be a suite of models and I like honestly 01 is like one of those Niche things too so like if I'm going to say that stat space models are small like so is one in that regards and that's like what I'm like interested in doing in 2025 so it's like yeah I mean maybe just to add to that for for me it's like I I've now used language model more and more and more and what I see is it's just really important what information you provide and long context models never work even the best ones they are really bad long context and the solution is not take take your data passes through this long context thing you need to pre-process your data and give the right data to the model I think that's the right approach and from my experience that USS much much much better results and so I think that's what we want did you try notebook LM I tried it yeah it's almost like the it's like how to best interly rag with long context uh I think yeah but their system so this is for example a system where you say like hey this is a product hey people want this I think they use multiple models and multiple model passes like they use Gemini but they're doing weird things under the hood which is why the open source replications are not going to cut um but I I think this is exactly what the future will look like complex systems you will not have like o1 where you like here's my data please solve things it's like no that's not going cut it um you have like complex interweave things and I think that actually makes open source more competitive because you can't launch complicated products but it's like this is back to the beginning it's like we have like Lin and things in open source and everyone the on linkchain but it's like how do you evolve linkchain at all into tooling that can quickly spin off notebook LM like what is a what is the infrastructure where the config file outputs notebook LM yes like that is just I don't know if there are any software Stacks that are open source that are like complicated maybe Linux maybe an operating system is that complicated yeah yeah I mean I I I'm working on that um so um I will take some time I'm not not started yet but I'm designing this system basically um but um yeah um um I think we at an early stage so that's a good advice for people too it's like assume that it is early and assume that your academic career is not a two-year bus cycle that you need to race through oh yeah oh yeah I think a main problem also in that space in sort of when it goes to complex system agents and so forth is like we haven't really defined the problems um when I talk to when I when I tell most people that hey I work on open source agents the first question they ask me is like what are agents what what what is unit definition it's like I relate um I don't what is an agent to you um um I don't know I had a definition and now I feel like it's less and less useful um I think a definition that makes sense to me is sort of an agent is sort of a system with multiple steps that that um sort of makes a plan plan on its own executes that plan um I think that's how most people would Define it um if you have that definition there I would say I I'm not working on agents uh because I think that that's not what what the future will look like I don't think that works um it's much more like a system than an agent in some ways where there's like rule following and you help could guide it to do be really good at a specific thing yeah yeah I think um so so you mentioned Lang chain there's also L graph Lang graph people like it much more because you take the planning and execution away from sort of the agent it's more like a pipeline where people can design more carefully sort of engineered things what is the difference I don't like what is the what would be the core technical um it's more fine grain control so you can say like if certain eviation has certain value go along this branch and whereas agent you would say like use my prompts and do what the answer says and like it makes no sense yeah it's a mess okay um anything else you want to add I think that it's like the most interesting thing is like you seem very bullish and open source winning oh yeah and it's like it's good to have this optimism and it's how do we make this more of a reality cuz like I we talked about metan doour multistakeholder I think most people like wor weird people that are deep in the weeds of this most people think it's just llama yeah so like how do we bridge that Gap yeah yeah I think um if you have the mindset that it will be complex systems it will not be a model receiving input and if you have um um this is sort of thinking is like you need something that's useful for people you don't want 01 where it looks shiny and nice and it can do reasoning but it's it's not super useful um you shouldn't do that you shouldn't try to replicate o one um you shouldn't try work on a good model um you need more complex things and so once you have this mindset and get away from like yeah I don't develop models and I don't and and focus is like I try to build something that is useful then you go in the notebook sort of LM Direction yeah which is easily doable by open source I think it's it's it's a bit more complicated and you need to piece things together and we don't have the open source it's almost like we need people to experiment and when you obviously are onto something that can work but has limitations that are just like rough edges not fast enough it's like ignore all the things that obviously get better in the archit technology and it's like we need people that are experimenting and that can become collaborative through open experimentation yeah yeah yeah um yeah so this is like that's like the summary of our conversation like be more creative on your approach and therefore the benefits will come eventually yes yes I I think I think that's U yeah that's a good takeaway that's fun okay well thanks for sitting down and doing this I don't I don't have more questions I'll slowly get off and turn off the various microphones going on yeah um yeah thank you so much again for having me um I mean one thing that could add I could talk a little bit about gpus and quantization do you want to I'll let you you can RI is good um so so one thing that people are ask me like which GPU should I buy and so I have here a certain perspective that might be helpful for people um I think it's not fully validated yet but sort of I mean you were mentioning Hardware gets better and better I think we're close to the end I think uh the next generation of gpus will more or less be the last gener ation of gpus that we get um uh there's just challenge of improving things um do you mean on Peak flop or are you also thinking on flop per watt it's more like flop per watt and um density I will not improve much it's it's more like um um I think what will become more important is networking data center Center level efficiency but not necessarily GPU or device level efficiency uh there are just a lot of physical problems there's still a little bit room for sort of improvements but uh the computational patterns are pretty optimal and um if we look at the scaling behavior of quantization which was basically the main thing that improved efficiency you had tensor course and then you went from 32 to 16 bit 8 bit didn't work quite out with blackw we can get 8 bit um but then um what about for bit like do four and two really or those just I mean research says like will not happen well it's only one bit paper that's the type of paper where I'm like oh have your fun but it feels fake so so I mean the thing is uh a couple papers point to this and I know a couple more papers will come the main thing is if you train as you train longer and longer you have more data that you basically train on per parameter this determines the bit Precision that you need one bit is good if you train a small model for not a long time or a large model for there might be cases where those further quantization matter but it'll be in lower data regimes um or you have a bigger model but at some point it becomes a trade-off if you have a bigger model you need more compute and so if you have more compute in one bit or less compute in 8 Bits does that mean like the 16 to8 range is where the most of the optimums LIE yeah you can get six maybe four I mean four for inference is pretty good um but for for training it will be quite questionable and I mean if our models just get more compute intensive I think the bit Precision will actually increase I have six Zori borderline um I think eight will be definitely possible with Blackwell no problem at all um so I think most training will be done an 8 bit when we have Blackwell um but yeah I think we can't squeeze the quantization much more yeah I'm not GNA push you at all on this I just find it fascinating and people find it fascinating I was like um and the other thing to add is like uh Black Will has will have particular Hardware features for quantization that makes it much easier is a comparable like we had fp16 but it was very difficult to use for training because you need to use mixed Precision because you have like problems with like um um your loss basically Vanishing or exploding and so not not being captured by the data type and then we had switch to brain float 16 suddenly people like oh I can train without any problem because now you have the entire range it's just yeah it's a change of the range and so Blackwell will have a similar change for quantisation so 8bit will be easy like you can get 8bit working if you do it well why does this only happen on Blackwell and not the previous because they have Hardware support and it's automatic and so um yeah so you could do it but it would be very slow before it would be slow and it would be hard so I mean if if if I would work it on this sort of problem I probably would need a couple months to really figure it out um apid training is possible but if you do with software it will be will not give you huge speed ups and um it's just difficult and with Blackwell it's like oh yeah pick a bit and everything's working wait have you used these have you actually used these new GPS or no I know the technical specification and then some sort of Secrets um about about also could get like once you connected to the right people you could like learn these things and that's right up your alley so it's interesting that's yeah I'm most say like quantization is a feature that I get to use and I'm not in that area so I just take the benefits as they come it's like one of my things is like there will be weird benefits that regularly come and it's good to be fast adopting things but like otherwise it just let people do these things and it's great yes uh but as I mentioned sort of um in the beginning is like quantization is one of these factors we now have maxed out the factor pretty much so we should look for other factors um but it gets more more difficult like we cranked up the multiplier on a lot of things and we quickly run out of multipliers it's so interesting because you are one of the people that everyone recognizes for quantization in other compute research but you're like I've needed to I'm starting my professor career and I'm going to be doing creative things because that's like where the future lies it's like models like like in some ways you're also der risked because if model scaling works you get the benefits anyways yeah but um now yeah it's um I mean I worked on quantization for such a long time but it's time to move on the the problem is kind of solved and we need to move on to different problems yeah anyway that was great thanks for adding this onong any other wisdom to drop I really enjoyed this conversation it was it's fun it's good to just have a you just like have a forcing function to talk about stuff and it'll be fun working together I'm sure we'll cross next year to that [Music]

