## Andrej Karpathy — “We’re summoning ghosts, not building animals”

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lXUZvyajciY

Today I'm speaking with Andrej Karpathy.
Andrej, why do you say that this will be   the decade of agents and not the year of agents?
First of all, thank you for having me here. I'm   excited to be here. The quote you've just 
mentioned, "It's the decade of agents,"   is actually a reaction to a pre-existing quote.
I'm not actually sure who said this but they were   alluding to this being the year of agents with 
respect to LLMs and how they were going to evolve.  I was triggered by that because there's some 
over-prediction going on in the industry.  In my mind, this is more accurately 
described as the decade of agents.  We have some very early agents that 
are extremely impressive and that I   use daily—Claude and Codex and so on—but I 
still feel there's so much work to be done.  My reaction is we'll be working 
with these things for a decade.  They're going to get better, 
and it's going to be wonderful.  I was just reacting to the 
timelines of the implication.  What do you think will take a decade to 
accomplish? What are the bottlenecks?  Actually making it work. When you're talking 
about an agent, or what the labs have in mind   and maybe what I have in mind as well, you 
should think of it almost like an employee or   an intern that you would hire to work with you.
For example, you work with some employees here.  When would you prefer to have an agent like 
Claude or Codex do that work? Currently,   of course they can't. What would it 
take for them to be able to do that?  Why don't you do it today?
The reason you don't do it   today is because they just don't work.
They don't have enough intelligence,   they're not multimodal enough, they 
can't do computer use and all this stuff.  They don't do a lot of the things you've 
alluded to earlier. They don't have   continual learning. You can't just tell 
them something and they'll remember it.  They're cognitively lacking 
and it's just not working.  It will take about a decade to 
work through all of those issues.  Interesting. As a professional podcaster 
and a viewer of AI from afar, it's easy   for me to identify what's lacking: continual 
learning is lacking, or multimodality is lacking.  But I don't really have a good way 
of trying to put a timeline on it.  If somebody asks how long continual learning 
will take, I have no prior about whether   this is a project that should take 5 
years, 10 years, or 50 years. Why a   decade? Why not one year? Why not 50 years?
This is where you get into a bit of my own   intuition, and doing a bit of an extrapolation 
with respect to my own experience in the field.  I've been in AI for almost two decades.
It's going to be 15 years or so, not that long.  You had Richard Sutton here, 
who was around for much longer.  I do have about 15 years of experience of people 
making predictions, of seeing how they turned out.  Also I was in the industry for 
a while, I was in research,   and I've worked in the industry for a while.  I have a general intuition 
that I have left from that.  I feel like the problems are tractable, they're 
surmountable, but they're still difficult.  If I just average it out, it 
just feels like a decade to me.  This is quite interesting. I want 
to hear not only the history,   but what people in the room felt was about to 
happen at various different breakthrough moments.  What were the ways in which their feelings were 
either overly pessimistic or overly optimistic?  Should we just go through each of them one by one?
That's a giant question because you're talking   about 15 years of stuff that happened.
AI is so wonderful because there have been   a number of seismic shifts where the entire 
field has suddenly looked a different way.  I've maybe lived through two or three of those.
I still think there will continue to be   some because they come with 
almost surprising regularity.  When my career began, when I started to work on 
deep learning, when I became interested in deep   learning, this was by chance of being right next 
to Geoff Hinton at the University of Toronto.  Geoff Hinton, of course, is 
the godfather figure of AI.  He was training all these neural networks.
I thought it was incredible and interesting.  This was not the main thing that 
everyone in AI was doing by far.  This was a niche little subject on the side.
That's maybe the first dramatic seismic shift   that came with the AlexNet and so on.
AlexNet reoriented everyone, and everyone   started to train neural networks, but it 
was still very per-task, per specific task.  Maybe I have an image classifier or I have a 
neural machine translator or something like that.  People became very slowly interested in agents.
People started to think, "Okay, maybe we have a   check mark next to the visual cortex or something 
like that, but what about the other parts of the   brain, and how can we get a full agent or a 
full entity that can interact in the world?"  The Atari deep reinforcement learning shift 
in 2013 or so was part of that early effort   of agents, in my mind, because it was an 
attempt to try to get agents that not just   perceive the world, but also take actions and 
interact and get rewards from environments.  At the time, this was Atari games.
I feel that was a misstep.  It was a misstep that even the early OpenAI that 
I was a part of adopted because at that time,   the zeitgeist was reinforcement learning 
environments, games, game playing,   beat games, get lots of different types of 
games, and OpenAI was doing a lot of that.  That was another prominent part of AI where maybe 
for two or three or four years, everyone was doing   reinforcement learning on games.
That was all a bit of a misstep.  What I was trying to do at OpenAI is 
I was always a bit suspicious of games   as being this thing that would lead to AGI.
Because in my mind, you want something like   an accountant or something that's 
interacting with the real world.  I just didn't see how games add up to it.
My project at OpenAI, for example, was within the   scope of the Universe project, on an agent that 
was using keyboard and mouse to operate web pages.  I really wanted to have something that 
interacts with the actual digital world   that can do knowledge work.
It just so turns out that this   was extremely early, way too early, so early 
that we shouldn't have been working on that.  Because if you're just stumbling your way around 
and keyboard mashing and mouse clicking and trying   to get rewards in these environments, your 
reward is too sparse and you just won't learn.  You're going to burn a forest 
computing, and you're never   going to get something off the ground.
What you're missing is this power of   representation in the neural network.
For example, today people are training   those computer-using agents, but they're 
doing it on top of a large language model.  You have to get the language model first, 
you have to get the representations first,   and you have to do that by all the 
pre-training and all the LLM stuff.  I feel maybe loosely speaking, people 
kept trying to get the full thing too   early a few times, where people really try 
to go after agents too early, I would say.  That was Atari and Universe 
and even my own experience.  You actually have to do some things 
first before you get to those agents.  Now the agents are a lot more competent, but maybe 
we're still missing some parts of that stack.  I would say those are the three major 
buckets of what people were doing:   training neural nets per-tasks, 
trying the first round of agents,   and then maybe the LLMs and seeking the 
representation power of the neural networks   before you tack on everything else on top.
Interesting. If I were to steelman the Sutton   perspective, it would be that humans 
can just take on everything at once,   or even animals can take on everything at once.
Animals are maybe a better example because they   don't even have the scaffold of language.
They just get thrown out into the world,   and they just have to make sense 
of everything without any labels.  The vision for AGI then should just be 
something which looks at sensory data,   looks at the computer screen, and it just 
figures out what's going on from scratch.  If a human were put in a similar situation and 
had to be trained from scratch… This is like a   human growing up or an animal growing up.
Why shouldn't that be the vision for AI,   rather than this thing where we're 
doing millions of years of training?  That's a really good question. Sutton was 
on your podcast and I saw the podcast and I   had a write-up about that podcast that 
gets into a bit of how I see things.  I'm very careful to make analogies to 
animals because they came about by a   very different optimization process.
Animals are evolved, and they come   with a huge amount of hardware that's built in.
For example, my example in the post was the zebra.  A zebra gets born, and a few minutes later 
it's running around and following its mother.  That's an extremely complicated thing to do. 
That's not reinforcement learning. That's   something that's baked in. Evolution obviously 
has some way of encoding the weights of our   neural nets in ATCGs, and I have no idea 
how that works, but it apparently works.  Brains just came from a very different process, 
and I'm very hesitant to take inspiration from it   because we're not actually running that process.
In my post, I said we're not building animals.  We're building ghosts or spirits or 
whatever people want to call it, because   we're not doing training by evolution.
We're doing training by imitation of humans   and the data that they've put on the Internet.
You end up with these ethereal spirit entities   because they're fully digital 
and they're mimicking humans.  It's a different kind of intelligence.
If you imagine a space of intelligences,   we're starting off at a different point almost. 
We're not really building animals. But it's also   possible to make them a bit more animal-like 
over time, and I think we should be doing that.   One more point. I do feel Sutton has a very...
His framework is, "We want to build animals."  I think that would be wonderful if we can 
get that to work. That would be amazing.   If there were a single algorithm that you 
can just run on the Internet and it learns   everything, that would be incredible.
I'm not sure that it exists and that's   certainly not what animals do, because 
animals have this outer loop of evolution.  A lot of what looks like learning is 
more like maturation of the brain.  I think there's very little 
reinforcement learning for animals.  A lot of the reinforcement learning is more 
like motor tasks; it's not intelligence tasks.  So I actually kind of think humans 
don’t really use RL, roughly speaking.  Can you repeat the last sentence?
A lot of that intelligence is   not motor task…it's what, sorry?
A lot of the reinforcement learning, in my   perspective, would be things that are a lot more 
motor-like, simple tasks like throwing a hoop.  But I don't think that humans use reinforcement 
learning for a lot of intelligence tasks   like problem-solving and so on.
That doesn't mean we shouldn't   do that for research, but I just feel 
like that's what animals do or don't.  I'm going to take a second to digest that 
because there are a lot of different ideas.  Here’s one clarifying question I can 
ask to understand the perspective.  You suggest that evolution is doing 
the kind of thing that pre-training   does in the sense of building something 
which can then understand the world.  The difference is that evolution 
has to be titrated in the case   of humans through three gigabytes of DNA.
That's very unlike the weights of a model.  Literally, the weights of the model are 
a brain, which obviously does not exist   in the sperm and the egg.
So it has to be grown.  Also, the information for every single 
synapse in the brain simply cannot exist   in the three gigabytes that exist in the DNA.
Evolution seems closer to finding the algorithm   which then does the lifetime learning.
Now, maybe the lifetime learning is   not analogous to RL, to your point.
Is that compatible with the thing you   were saying, or would you disagree with that?
I think so. I would agree with you that there's   some miraculous compression 
going on because obviously,   the weights of the neural net are not stored 
in ATCGs. There's some dramatic compression.   There are some learning algorithms encoded that 
take over and do some of the learning online.  I definitely agree with you on that.
I would say I'm a lot more practically minded.  I don't come at it from the 
perspective of, let's build animals.  I come from it from the perspective 
of, let's build useful things.  I have a hard hat on, and I'm just 
observing that we're not going to do   evolution, because I don't know how to do that.
But it does turn out we can build these ghosts,   spirit-like entities, by imitating internet 
documents. This works. It's a way to bring you   up to something that has a lot of built-in 
knowledge and intelligence in some way,   similar to maybe what evolution has done.
That's why I call pre-training   this crappy evolution.
It's the practically possible version   with our technology and what we have available 
to us to get to a starting point where we can do   things like reinforcement learning and so on.
Just to steelman the other perspective,   after doing this Sutton interview and thinking 
about it a bit, he has an important point here.  Evolution does not give us the knowledge, really.
It gives us the algorithm to find the knowledge,   and that seems different from pre-training.
Perhaps the perspective is that pre-training helps   build the kind of entity which can learn better.
It teaches meta-learning, and therefore   it is similar to finding an algorithm.
But if it's "Evolution gives us knowledge,   pre-training gives us knowledge," 
that analogy seems to break down.  It's subtle and I think you're right to 
push back on it, but basically the thing   that pre-training is doing, you're getting 
the next-token predictor over the internet,   and you're training that into a neural net.
It's doing two things that are unrelated.  Number one, it's picking up all 
this knowledge, as I call it.  Number two, it's actually becoming intelligent.
By observing the algorithmic patterns in the   internet, it boots up all these little circuits 
and algorithms inside the neural net to do things   like in-context learning and all this stuff.
You don't need or want the knowledge.  I think that's probably holding back the neural 
networks overall because it's getting them to rely   on the knowledge a little too much sometimes.
For example, I feel agents, one thing they're   not very good at, is going off the data 
manifold of what exists on the internet.  If they had less knowledge or less 
memory, maybe they would be better.  What I think we have to do going forward—and 
this would be part of the research paradigms—is   figure out ways to remove some of the knowledge 
and to keep what I call this cognitive core.  It's this intelligent entity that is stripped from 
knowledge but contains the algorithms and contains   the magic of intelligence and problem-solving 
and the strategies of it and all this stuff.  There's so much interesting stuff there. Let's 
start with in-context learning. This is an   obvious point, but I think it's worth just 
saying it explicitly and meditating on it.  The situation in which these models seem the most 
intelligent—in which I talk to them and I'm like,   "Wow, there's really something on the other end 
that's responding to me thinking about things—is   if it makes a mistake it's like, "Oh wait, that's 
the wrong way to think about it. I'm backing up."   All that is happening in context.
That's where I feel like the real   intelligence is that you can visibly see.
That in-context learning process is   developed by gradient descent on pre-training.
It spontaneously meta-learns in-context learning,   but the in-context learning itself is not 
gradient descent, in the same way that our   lifetime intelligence as humans to be able 
to do things is conditioned by evolution   but our learning during our lifetime is 
happening through some other process.  I don't fully agree with that, but 
you should continue your thought.  Well, I'm very curious to understand 
how that analogy breaks down.  I'm hesitant to say that in-context 
learning is not doing gradient descent.  It's not doing explicit gradient descent.
In-context learning is pattern completion   within a token window.
It just turns out that there's   a huge amount of patterns on the internet.
You're right, the model learns to complete   the pattern, and that's inside the weights.
The weights of the neural network are trying   to discover patterns and complete the pattern.
There's some adaptation that happens inside   the neural network, which is magical 
and just falls out from the internet   just because there's a lot of patterns.
I will say that there have been some papers   that I thought were interesting that look at 
the mechanisms behind in-context learning.  I do think it's possible that in-context 
learning runs a small gradient descent loop   internally in the layers of the neural network.
I recall one paper in particular where they were   doing linear regression using in-context learning.
Your inputs into the neural network are XY pairs,   XY, XY, XY that happen to be on the line.
Then you do X and you expect Y.  The neural network, when you train it 
in this way, does linear regression.  Normally when you would run linear regression, you 
have a small gradient descent optimizer that looks   at XY, looks at an error, calculates the gradient 
of the weights and does the update a few times.  It just turns out that when they looked at the 
weights of that in-context learning algorithm,   they found some analogies to 
gradient descent mechanics.  In fact, I think the paper was even stronger 
because they hardcoded the weights of a neural   network to do gradient descent through 
attention and all the internals of the   neural network. That's just my only pushback. 
Who knows how in-context learning works,   but I think that it's probably doing a bit of some 
funky gradient descent internally. I think that   that's possible. I was only pushing back on your 
saying that it's not doing in-context learning.  Who knows what it's doing, but it's probably maybe 
doing something similar to it, but we don't know.  So then it's worth thinking okay, if 
in-context learning and pre-training   are both implementing something like gradient 
descent, why does it feel like with in-context   learning we're getting to this continual 
learning, real intelligence-like thing?  Whereas you don't get the analogous feeling just 
from pre-training. You could argue that. If it's   the same algorithm, what could be different?
One way you could think about it is,   how much information does the model store 
per information it receives from training?  If you look at pre-training, if 
you look at Llama 3 for example,   I think it's trained on 15 trillion tokens.
If you look at the 70B model, that would   be the equivalent of 0.07 bits per 
token that it sees in pre-training,   in terms of the information in the weights 
of the model compared to the tokens it reads.  Whereas if you look at the KV cache 
and how it grows per additional token   in in-context learning, it's like 320 kilobytes.
So that's a 35 million-fold difference in how much   information per token is assimilated by the model.
I wonder if that's relevant at all.  I kind of agree. The way I usually put this is 
that anything that happens during the training of   the neural network, the knowledge is only a hazy 
recollection of what happened in training time.  That's because the compression is dramatic.
You're taking 15 trillion tokens and you're   compressing it to just your final neural 
network of a few billion parameters.  Obviously it's a massive 
amount of compression going on.  So I refer to it as a hazy 
recollection of the internet documents.  Whereas anything that happens in the 
context window of the neural network—you're   plugging in all the tokens and building up 
all those KV cache representations—is very   directly accessible to the neural net.
So I compare the KV cache and the stuff   that happens at test time to 
more like a working memory.  All the stuff that's in the context window is 
very directly accessible to the neural net.  There's always these almost surprising 
analogies between LLMs and humans.  I find them surprising because we're not 
trying to build a human brain directly.  We're just finding that this 
works and we're doing it.  But I do think that anything 
that's in the weights, it's a   hazy recollection of what you read a year ago.
Anything that you give it as a context at test   time is directly in the working memory.
That's a very powerful analogy to   think through things.
When you, for example,   go to an LLM and you ask it about some book 
and what happened in it, like Nick Lane's   book or something like that, the LLM will often 
give you some stuff which is roughly correct.  But if you give it the full chapter and ask it 
questions, you're going to get much better results   because it's now loaded in the 
working memory of the model.  So a very long way of saying 
I agree and that's why.  Stepping back, what is the part 
about human intelligence that we   have most failed to replicate with these models?  Just a lot of it. So maybe one way to think 
about it, I don't know if this is the best way,   but I almost feel like — again, making these 
analogies imperfect as they are — we've stumbled   by with the transformer neural network, 
which is extremely powerful, very general.  You can train transformers on audio, or 
video, or text, or whatever you want,   and it just learns patterns and they're 
very powerful, and it works really well.  That to me almost indicates that this 
is some piece of cortical tissue.  It's something like that, because the 
cortex is famously very plastic as well.  You can rewire parts of brains.
There were the slightly gruesome experiments   with rewiring the visual cortex to the auditory 
cortex, and this animal learned fine, et cetera.  So I think that this is cortical tissue.
I think when we're doing reasoning and   planning inside the neural networks, doing 
reasoning traces for thinking models,   that's kind of like the prefrontal cortex.
Maybe those are like little checkmarks,   but I still think there are many brain 
parts and nuclei that are not explored.  For example, there's a basal ganglia doing a 
bit of reinforcement learning when we fine-tune   the models on reinforcement learning. But where's 
the hippocampus? Not obvious what that would be.  Some parts are probably not important.
Maybe the cerebellum is not important   to cognition, its thoughts, so 
maybe we can skip some of it.  But I still think there's, for example, the 
amygdala, all the emotions and instincts.  There's probably a bunch of other nuclei 
in the brain that are very ancient that   I don't think we've really replicated.
I don't know that we should be pursuing the   building of an analog of a human brain.
I'm an engineer mostly at heart.  Maybe another way to answer the question is that 
you're not going to hire this thing as an intern.  It's missing a lot of it because it comes with 
a lot of these cognitive deficits that we all   intuitively feel when we talk to the models.
So it's not fully there yet.  You can look at it as not all the 
brain parts are checked off yet.  This is maybe relevant to the question of thinking 
about how fast these issues will be solved.  Sometimes people will say 
about continual learning,   "Look, you could easily replicate this capability.
Just as in-context learning emerged spontaneously   as a result of pre-training, continual 
learning over longer horizons will emerge   spontaneously if the model is incentivized to 
recollect information over longer horizons,   or horizons longer than one session."
So if there's some outer loop RL which has   many sessions within that outer loop, then this 
continual learning where it fine-tunes itself,   or it writes to an external memory or 
something, will just emerge spontaneously.  Do you think things like that are plausible?
I just don't have a prior over   how plausible that is.
How likely is that to happen?  I don't know that I fully resonate with that.
These models, when you boot them up and they have   zero tokens in the window, they're always 
restarting from scratch where they were.  So I don't know in that 
worldview what it looks like.  Maybe making some analogies to humans—just because 
I think it's roughly concrete and interesting to   think through—I feel like when I'm awake, I'm 
building up a context window of stuff that's   happening during the day.
But when I go to sleep,   something magical happens where I don't 
think that context window stays around.  There's some process of distillation 
into the weights of my brain.  This happens during sleep and all this stuff.
We don't have an equivalent   of that in large language models.
That's to me more adjacent to when you talk   about continual learning and so on as absent.
These models don't really have a distillation   phase of taking what happened, analyzing it 
obsessively, thinking through it, doing some   synthetic data generation process and distilling 
it back into the weights, and maybe having   a specific neural net per person. Maybe it's 
a LoRA. It's not a full-weight neural network.  It's just some small sparse subset 
of the weights that are changed.  But we do want to create ways of creating 
these individuals that have very long context.  It's not only remaining in the context window 
because the context windows grow very, very long.  Maybe we have some very elaborate, 
sparse attention over it.  But I still think that humans obviously have some 
process for distilling some of that knowledge   into the weights. We're missing it. I do also 
think that humans have some very elaborate,   sparse attention scheme, which I think 
we're starting to see some early hints of.  DeepSeek v3.2 just came out and I saw that they 
have sparse attention as an example, and this is   one way to have very, very long context windows.
So I feel like we are redoing a lot of the   cognitive tricks that evolution came up 
with through a very different process.  But we're going to converge on a 
similar architecture cognitively.  In 10 years, do you think it'll still be something 
like a transformer, but with much more modified   attention and more sparse MLPs and so forth?
The way I like to think about it is   translation invariance in time.
So 10 years ago, where were we? 2015.  In 2015, we had convolutional neural networks 
primarily, residual networks just came out.  So remarkably similar, I guess, but quite a 
bit different still. The transformer was not   around. All these more modern tweaks 
on the transformer were not around.  Maybe some of the things that we can bet on, I 
think in 10 years by translational equivariance,   is that we're still training giant neural 
networks with a forward backward pass and   update through gradient descent, 
but maybe it looks a bit different,   and it's just that everything is much bigger.
Recently I went back all the way to 1989 which   was a fun exercise for me, a few years ago, 
because I was reproducing Yann LeCun's 1989   convolutional network, which was the first neural 
network I'm aware of trained via gradient descent,   like modern neural network trained 
gradient descent on digit recognition.  I was just interested in 
how I could modernize this.  How much of this is algorithms?
How much of this is data?  How much of this progress is compute and systems?
I was able to very quickly halve the learning   just by time traveling by 33 years.
So if I time travel by algorithms 33 years,   I could adjust what Yann LeCun did 
in 1989, and I could halve the error.  But to get further gains, I 
had to add a lot more data,   I had to 10x the training set, and then I 
had to add more computational optimizations.  I had to train for much longer with dropout 
and other regularization techniques.  So all these things have 
to improve simultaneously.  We're probably going to have a lot more 
data, we're probably going to have a lot   better hardware, probably going to have a lot 
better kernels and software, we're probably   going to have better algorithms.
All of those, it's almost like   no one of them is winning too much.
All of them are surprisingly equal.  This has been the trend for a while.
So to answer your question, I expect differences   algorithmically to what's happening today.
But I do also expect that some of the   things that have stuck around for a very 
long time will probably still be there.  It's probably still a giant neural network trained 
with gradient descent. That would be my guess.  It's surprising that all of those things 
together only halved the error, 30 years   of progress…. Maybe half is a lot. Because if 
you halve the error, that actually means that…  Half is a lot. But I guess what was shocking to me 
is everything needs to improve across the board:   architecture, optimizer, loss function.
It also has improved across the board forever.  So I expect all those 
changes to be alive and well.  Yeah. I was about to ask you a very 
similar question about nanochat.  Since you just coded it up recently, 
every single step in the process of   building a chatbot is fresh in your RAM.
I'm curious if you had similar thoughts about,   "Oh, there was no one thing that was 
relevant to going from GPT-2 to nanochat."  What are some surprising 
takeaways from the experience?  Of building nanochat? So nanochat 
is a repository I released.  Was it yesterday or the day 
before? I can't remember.  We can see the sleep 
deprivation that went into the…  It's trying to be the simplest complete 
repository that covers the whole pipeline   end-to-end of building a ChatGPT clone.
So you have all of the steps, not just   any individual step, which is a bunch.
I worked on all the individual steps   in the past and released small pieces 
of code that show you how that's done   in an algorithmic sense, in simple code.
But this handles the entire pipeline.  In terms of learning, I don't 
know that I necessarily found   something that I learned from it.
I already had in my mind how you build it.  This is just the process of mechanically building 
it and making it clean enough so that people can   learn from it and that they find it useful.
What is the best way for somebody   to learn from it?
Is it to just delete   all the code and try to reimplement from 
scratch, try to add modifications to it?  That's a great question. Basically 
it's about 8,000 lines of code   that takes you through the entire pipeline.
I would probably put it on the right monitor.  If you have two monitors, you put it on the right.
You want to build it from scratch,   you build it from the start.
You're not allowed to copy-paste, you're allowed   to reference, you're not allowed to copy-paste.
Maybe that's how I would do it.  But I also think the repository 
by itself is a pretty large beast.  When you write this code, you don't go from top 
to bottom, you go from chunks and you grow the   chunks, and that information is absent.
You wouldn't know where to start.  So it's not just a final repository that's 
needed, it's the building of the repository,   which is a complicated chunk-growing process.
So that part is not there yet.  I would love to add that probably later this week.
It's probably a video or something like that.  Roughly speaking, that's what I would try to do.
Build the stuff yourself, but don't allow   yourself copy-paste.
I do think that   there's two types of knowledge, almost.
There's the high-level surface knowledge, but when   you build something from scratch, you're forced to 
come to terms with what you don't understand and   you don't know that you don't understand it.
It always leads to a deeper understanding.  It's the only way to build.
If I can't build it, I don't understand it.  That’s a Feynman quote, I believe.
I 100% have always believed this very   strongly, because there are all these micro 
things that are just not properly arranged   and you don't really have the knowledge.
You just think you have the knowledge.  So don't write blog posts, don't 
do slides, don't do any of that.  Build the code, arrange it, get it to work.
It's the only way to go. Otherwise,   you're missing knowledge.
You tweeted out that coding models   were of very little help to you in assembling 
this repository. I'm curious why that was.  I guess I built the repository over 
a period of a bit more than a month.  I would say there are three major classes 
of how people interact with code right now.  Some people completely reject all of LLMs 
and they are just writing by scratch.  This is probably not the 
right thing to do anymore.  The intermediate part, which is where I am, is 
you still write a lot of things from scratch,   but you use the autocomplete that's 
available now from these models.  So when you start writing out a little 
piece of it, it will autocomplete for   you and you can just tap through.
Most of the time it's correct,   sometimes it's not, and you edit it.
But you're still very much the   architect of what you're writing.
Then there's the vibe coding: "Hi,   please implement this or that," enter, and then 
let the model do it. That's the agents. I do feel   like the agents work in very specific settings, 
and I would use them in specific settings.  But these are all tools available to you 
and you have to learn what they're good at,   what they're not good at, and when to use them.
So the agents are pretty good, for example,   if you're doing boilerplate stuff.
Boilerplate code that's just   copy-paste stuff, they're very good at that.
They're very good at stuff that occurs very often   on the Internet because there are lots of examples 
of it in the training sets of these models.  There are features of things where 
the models will do very well.  I would say nanochat is not an example of 
those because it's a fairly unique repository.  There's not that much code in the way that 
I've structured it. It's not boilerplate code.   It's intellectually intense code almost, and 
everything has to be very precisely arranged.  The models have so many cognitive deficits.
One example, they kept misunderstanding the code   because they have too much memory from 
all the typical ways of doing things on   the Internet that I just wasn't adopting.
The models, for example—I don't know if I   want to get into the full details—but they kept 
thinking I'm writing normal code, and I'm not.  Maybe one example?
You have eight GPUs   that are all doing forward, backwards.
The way to synchronize gradients between   them is to use a Distributed Data Parallel 
container of PyTorch, which automatically   as you're doing the backward, it will start 
communicating and synchronizing gradients.  I didn't use DDP because I didn't want 
to use it, because it's not necessary.  I threw it out and wrote my own synchronization 
routine that's inside the step of the optimizer.  The models were trying to get me to 
use the DDP container. They were very   concerned. This gets way too technical, 
but I wasn't using that container because   I don't need it and I have a custom 
implementation of something like it.  They just couldn't internalize 
that you had your own.  They couldn't get past that. They kept trying to 
mess up the style. They're way too over-defensive.   They make all these try-catch statements.
They keep trying to make a production code base,   and I have a bunch of assumptions 
in my code, and it's okay.  I don't need all this extra stuff in there.
So I feel like they're bloating the code base,   bloating the complexity, they keep 
misunderstanding, they're using   deprecated APIs a bunch of times. It's a total 
mess. It's just not net useful. I can go in,   I can clean it up, but it's not net useful.
I also feel like it's annoying to have to   type out what I want in English 
because it's too much typing.  If I just navigate to the part of the code that I 
want, and I go where I know the code has to appear   and I start typing out the first few letters, 
autocomplete gets it and just gives you the code.  This is a very high information 
bandwidth to specify what you want.  You point to the code where you want 
it, you type out the first few pieces,   and the model will complete it.
So what I mean is, these models   are good in certain parts of the stack.
There are two examples where I use the   models that I think are illustrative.
One was when I generated the report.  That's more boilerplate-y, so I 
partially vibe-coded some of that stuff.  That was fine because it's not 
mission-critical stuff, and it works fine.  The other part is when I was 
rewriting the tokenizer in Rust.  I'm not as good at Rust 
because I'm fairly new to Rust.  So there's a bit of vibe coding going on 
when I was writing some of the Rust code.  But I had a Python implementation that I 
fully understand, and I'm just making sure   I'm making a more efficient version of it, and 
I have tests so I feel safer doing that stuff.  They increase accessibility to languages or 
paradigms that you might not be as familiar with.  I think they're very helpful there as well.
There's a ton of Rust code out there,   the models are pretty good at it.
I happen to not know that much about it,   so the models are very useful there.
The reason this question is so interesting   is because the main story people 
have about AI exploding and getting   to superintelligence pretty rapidly is AI 
automating AI engineering and AI research.  They'll look at the fact that you can have 
Claude Code and make entire applications,   CRUD applications, from scratch and think, "If 
you had this same capability inside of OpenAI   and DeepMind and everything, just imagine 
a thousand of you or a million of you in   parallel, finding little architectural tweaks."
It's quite interesting to hear you say that this   is the thing they're asymmetrically worse at.
It's quite relevant to forecasting whether   the AI 2027-type explosion is 
likely to happen anytime soon.  That's a good way of putting it, and you're 
getting at why my timelines are a bit longer.   You're right. They're not very good at code 
that has never been written before, maybe it's   one way to put it, which is what we're trying 
to achieve when we're building these models.  Very naive question, but the architectural 
tweaks that you're adding to nanochat,   they're in a paper somewhere, right?
They might even be in a repo somewhere.  Is it surprising that they aren't able to 
integrate that into whenever you're like,   "Add RoPE embeddings" or something, 
they do that in the wrong way?  It's tough. They know, but they don't fully know.
They don't know how to fully integrate it into   the repo and your style and your code and 
your place, and some of the custom things   that you're doing and how it fits with 
all the assumptions of the repository.  They do have some knowledge, but they 
haven't gotten to the place where they   can integrate it and make sense of it.
A lot of the stuff continues to improve.  Currently, the state-of-the-art 
model that I go to is the GPT-5 Pro,   and that's a very powerful model.
If I have 20 minutes,   I will copy-paste my entire repo and I go to 
GPT-5 Pro, the oracle, for some questions.  Often it's not too bad and surprisingly 
good compared to what existed a year ago.  Overall, the models are not there.
I feel like the industry is making too   big of a jump and is trying to pretend like this 
is amazing, and it's not. It's slop. They're not   coming to terms with it, and maybe they're 
trying to fundraise or something like that.  I'm not sure what's going on, but we're 
at this intermediate stage. The models are   amazing. They still need a lot of work.
For now, autocomplete is my sweet spot.  But sometimes, for some types of 
code, I will go to an LLM agent.  Here's another reason this is really interesting.
Through the history of programming, there have   been many productivity improvements—compilers, 
linting, better programming languages—which   have increased programmer productivity 
but have not led to an explosion.  That sounds very much like the 
autocomplete tab, and this other   category is just automation of the programmer.
It's interesting you're seeing more in the   category of the historical analogies 
of better compilers or something.  Maybe this gets to one other thought.
I have a hard time differentiating where   AI begins and stops because I see 
AI as fundamentally an extension of   computing in a pretty fundamental way.
I see a continuum of this recursive   self-improvement or speeding up programmers 
all the way from the beginning: code editors,   syntax highlighting, or checking even of 
the types, like data type checking—all   these tools that we've built for 
each other. Even search engines.   Why aren't search engines part of AI? Ranking 
is AI. At some point, Google, even early on,   was thinking of themselves as an AI company doing 
Google Search engine, which is totally fair.  I see it as a lot more of a continuum than other 
people do, and it's hard for me to draw the line.  I feel like we're now getting a much 
better autocomplete, and now we're also   getting some agents which are these loopy 
things, but they go off-rails sometimes.  What's going on is that the human is progressively 
doing a bit less and less of the low-level stuff.  We're not writing the assembly 
code because we have compilers.  Compilers will take my high-level 
language in C and write the assembly code.  We're abstracting ourselves very, very slowly.
There's this what I call "autonomy slider," where   more and more stuff is automated—of the stuff that 
can be automated at any point in time—and we're   doing a bit less and less and raising ourselves 
in the layer of abstraction over the automation.  Let's talk about RL a bit.
You tweeted some very   interesting things about this.
Conceptually, how should we think about   the way that humans are able to build a rich world 
model just from interacting with our environment,   and in ways that seem almost irrespective of 
the final reward at the end of the episode?  If somebody is starting a business, and at 
the end of 10 years, she finds out whether   the business succeeded or failed, we say that 
she's earned a bunch of wisdom and experience.  But it's not because the log probs of every 
single thing that happened over the last 10   years are up-weighted or down-weighted.
Something much more deliberate and   rich is happening.
What is the ML analogy, and how does that   compare to what we're doing with LLMs right now?
Maybe the way I would put it is that humans don't   use reinforcement learning, as I said.
I think they do something different.  Reinforcement learning is a lot worse than I 
think the average person thinks. Reinforcement   learning is terrible. It just so happens 
that everything that we had before it is   much worse because previously we were just 
imitating people, so it has all these issues.  In reinforcement learning, say you're solving 
a math problem, because it's very simple.  You're given a math problem and 
you're trying to find the solution.  In reinforcement learning, you will 
try lots of things in parallel first.  You're given a problem, you try hundreds of 
different attempts. These attempts can be complex.   They can be like, "Oh, let me try this, let me try 
that, this didn't work, that didn't work," etc.  Then maybe you get an answer.
Now you check the back of the book and you see,   "Okay, the correct answer is this."
You can see that this one, this one,   and that one got the correct answer, 
but these other 97 of them didn't.  Literally what reinforcement learning does is it 
goes to the ones that worked really well and every   single thing you did along the way, every single 
token gets upweighted like, "Do more of this."  The problem with that is people will say 
that your estimator has high variance,   but it's just noisy. It's noisy. It almost assumes 
that every single little piece of the solution   that you made that arrived at the right answer 
was the correct thing to do, which is not true.  You may have gone down the wrong alleys 
until you arrived at the right solution.  Every single one of those incorrect things you 
did, as long as you got to the correct solution,   will be upweighted as, "Do more of this." 
It's terrible. It's noise. You've done all   this work only to find, at the end, you get a 
single number of like, "Oh, you did correct."  Based on that, you weigh that entire 
trajectory as like, upweight or downweight.  The way I like to put it is you're 
sucking supervision through a straw.  You've done all this work that 
could be a minute of rollout,   and you're sucking the bits of supervision of the 
final reward signal through a straw and you're   broadcasting that across the entire trajectory 
and using that to upweight or downweight that   trajectory. It's just stupid and 
crazy. A human would never do this.  Number one, a human would 
never do hundreds of rollouts.  Number two, when a person finds a solution, 
they will have a pretty complicated process   of review of, "Okay, I think these parts I 
did well, these parts I did not do that well.  I should probably do this or that." 
They think through things. There's   nothing in current LLMs that does this. 
There's no equivalent of it. But I do see   papers popping out that are trying to do this 
because it's obvious to everyone in the field.  The first imitation learning, by the way, was 
extremely surprising and miraculous and amazing,   that we can fine-tune by imitation on humans. 
That was incredible. Because in the beginning,   all we had was base models. Base models 
are autocomplete. It wasn't obvious to   me at the time, and I had to learn this.
The paper that blew my mind was InstructGPT,   because it pointed out that you can take 
the pretrained model, which is autocomplete,   and if you just fine-tune it on text that looks 
like conversations, the model will very rapidly   adapt to become very conversational, and it 
keeps all the knowledge from pre-training.  This blew my mind because I didn't understand 
that stylistically, it can adjust so quickly   and become an assistant to a user through just 
a few loops of fine-tuning on that kind of data.  It was very miraculous to me that that worked. 
So incredible. That was two to three years of   work. Now came RL. And RL allows you to do a bit 
better than just imitation learning because you   can have these reward functions and you 
can hill-climb on the reward functions.  Some problems have just correct answers, you 
can hill-climb on that without getting expert   trajectories to imitate. So that's amazing. The 
model can also discover solutions that a human   might never come up with. This is incredible. 
Yet, it's still stupid. We need more. I saw a   paper from Google yesterday that tried to 
have this reflect & review idea in mind.  Was it the memory bank paper or something? I don't 
know. I've seen a few papers along these lines.  So I expect there to be some major update to how 
we do algorithms for LLMs coming in that realm.  I think we need three or four or 
five more, something like that.  You're so good at coming up with evocative 
phrases. "Sucking supervision through a   straw." It's so good. You're saying the problem 
with outcome-based reward is that you have this   huge trajectory, and then at the end, you're 
trying to learn every single possible thing   about what you should do and what you should 
learn about the world from that one final bit.  Given the fact that this is obvious, why hasn't 
process-based supervision as an alternative been   a successful way to make models more capable?
What has been preventing us from using   this alternative paradigm?
Process-based supervision just   refers to the fact that we're not going to 
have a reward function only at the very end.  After you've done 10 minutes of work, I'm not 
going to tell you you did well or not well.  I'm going to tell you at every single 
step of the way how well you're doing.  The reason we don't have that is 
it's tricky how you do that properly.  You have partial solutions and you 
don't know how to assign credit.  So when you get the right answer, it's just 
an equality match to the answer. It’s very   simple to implement. If you're doing process 
supervision, how do you assign in an automatable   way, a partial credit assignment?
It's not obvious how you do it.  Lots of labs are trying to 
do it with these LLM judges.  You get LLMs to try to do it.
You prompt an LLM, "Hey,   look at a partial solution of a student.
How well do you think they're doing if the   answer is this?" and they try to tune the prompt.
The reason that this is tricky is quite subtle.  It's the fact that anytime you use an LLM to 
assign a reward, those LLMs are giant things   with billions of parameters, and they're gameable.
If you're reinforcement learning with respect to   them, you will find adversarial examples 
for your LLM judges, almost guaranteed.  So you can't do this for too long.
You do maybe 10 steps or 20 steps, and maybe   it will work, but you can't do 100 or 1,000.
I understand it's not obvious, but basically   the model will find little cracks.
It will find all these spurious   things in the nooks and crannies of the 
giant model and find a way to cheat it.  One example that's prominently in my mind, this 
was probably public, if you're using an LLM judge   for a reward, you just give it a solution from a 
student and ask it if the student did well or not.  We were training with 
reinforcement learning against   that reward function, and it worked really well.
Then, suddenly, the reward became extremely large.  It was a massive jump, and it did perfect.
You're looking at it like, "Wow, this means   the student is perfect in all these problems. 
It's fully solved math." But when you look at   the completions that you're getting from 
the model, they are complete nonsense.  They start out okay, and then 
they change to "dhdhdhdh."  It's just like, "Oh, okay, let's take two plus 
three and we do this and this, and then dhdhdhdh."  You're looking at it, and 
it's like, this is crazy.  How is it getting a reward of one or 100%?
You look at the LLM judge, and it turns out   that "dhdhdhdh" is an adversarial example for 
the model, and it assigns 100% probability to it.  It's just because this is an 
out-of-sample example to the LLM.  It's never seen it during training, 
and you're in pure generalization land.  It's never seen it during training, and in 
the pure generalization land, you can find   these examples that break it.
You're basically training   the LLM to be a prompt injection model.
Not even that. Prompt injection is way too fancy.  You're finding adversarial 
examples, as they're called.  These are nonsensical solutions that are obviously 
wrong, but the model thinks they are amazing.  To the extent you think this is the 
bottleneck to making RL more functional,   then that will require making LLMs better judges, 
if you want to do this in an automated way.  Is it just going to be some sort 
of GAN-like approach where you   have to train models to be more robust?
The labs are probably doing all that.  The obvious thing is, "dhdhdhdh" 
should not get 100% reward.  Okay, well, take "dhdhdhdh," put it 
in the training set of the LLM judge,   and say this is not 100%, this is 0%.
You can do this, but every time you do   this, you get a new LLM, and it 
still has adversarial examples.  There's an infinity of adversarial examples.
Probably if you iterate this a few times, it'll   probably be harder and harder to find adversarial 
examples, but I'm not 100% sure because this thing   has a trillion parameters or whatnot.
I bet you the labs are trying.  I still think we need other ideas.
Interesting. Do you have some shape   of what the other idea could be?
This idea of a review solution   encompassing synthetic examples such that 
when you train on them, you get better,   and meta-learn it in some way.
I think there are some papers   that I'm starting to see pop out.
I am only at a stage of reading abstracts   because a lot of these papers are just ideas.
Someone has to make it work on a frontier   LLM lab scale in full generality 
because when you see these papers,   they pop up, and it's just a bit noisy.
They're cool ideas, but I haven't seen   anyone convincingly show that this is possible.
That said, the LLM labs are fairly closed,   so who knows what they're doing now.
I can conceptualize how you would be able   to train on synthetic examples or synthetic 
problems that you have made for yourself.  But there seems to be another thing humans 
do—maybe sleep is this, maybe daydreaming is   this—which is not necessarily to come up 
with fake problems, but just to reflect.  I'm not sure what the ML analogy is for 
daydreaming or sleeping, or just reflecting.  I haven't come up with a new problem.
Obviously, the very basic analogy would just   be fine-tuning on reflection bits, but I feel like 
in practice that probably wouldn't work that well.  Do you have some take on what 
the analogy of this thing is?  I do think that we're missing some aspects there.
As an example, let’s take reading a book.  Currently when LLMs are reading a book, what that 
means is we stretch out the sequence of text,   and the model is predicting the next token, 
and it's getting some knowledge from that.  That's not really what humans do.
When you're reading a book,   I don't even feel like the book is exposition 
I'm supposed to be attending to and training on.  The book is a set of prompts for 
me to do synthetic data generation,   or for you to get to a book club 
and talk about it with your friends.  It's by manipulating that information 
that you actually gain that knowledge.  We have no equivalent of that with LLMs. They 
don't really do that. I'd love to see during   pre-training some stage that thinks through 
the material and tries to reconcile it with   what it already knows, and thinks through it 
for some amount of time and gets that to work.  There's no equivalence of any of this. 
This is all research. There are some   subtle—very subtle that I think are very hard 
to understand—reasons why it's not trivial.  If I can just describe one: why can't we 
just synthetically generate and train on it?  Because every synthetic example, if 
I just give synthetic generation of   the model thinking about a book, you look 
at it and you're like, "This looks great.  Why can't I train on it?"
You could try, but the model   will get much worse if you continue trying.
That's because all of the samples you get   from models are silently collapsed.
Silently—it is not obvious if you look   at any individual example of it—they occupy 
a very tiny manifold of the possible space of   thoughts about content.
The LLMs, when they come off,   they're what we call "collapsed."
They have a collapsed data distribution.  One easy way to see it is to go to 
ChatGPT and ask it, "Tell me a joke."  It only has like three jokes.
It's not giving you the whole breadth   of possible jokes. It knows like three jokes. 
They're silently collapsed. You're not getting   the richness and the diversity and the entropy 
from these models as you would get from humans.  Humans are a lot noisier, but 
at least they're not biased,   in a statistical sense. They're not silently 
collapsed. They maintain a huge amount of entropy.  So how do you get synthetic data generation to 
work despite the collapse and while maintaining   the entropy? That’s a research problem.
Just to make sure I understood, the reason   that the collapse is relevant to synthetic data 
generation is because you want to be able to   come up with synthetic problems or reflections 
which are not already in your data distribution?  I guess what I'm saying is, say we have a chapter 
of a book and I ask an LLM to think about it,   it will give you something 
that looks very reasonable.  But if I ask it 10 times, you'll 
notice that all of them are the same.  You can't just keep scaling "reflection" 
on the same amount of prompt information   and then get returns from that.
Any individual sample will look okay,   but the distribution of it is quite terrible.
It's quite terrible in such a way that if   you continue training on too much of 
your own stuff, you actually collapse.  I think that there's possibly 
no fundamental solution to this.  I also think humans collapse over time. 
These analogies are surprisingly good.   Humans collapse during the course of their lives.
This is why children, they haven't overfit yet.  They will say stuff that will shock you 
because you can see where they're coming from,   but it's just not the thing people say, 
because they're not yet collapsed. But we're   collapsed. We end up revisiting the same thoughts.
We end up saying more and more of the same stuff,   and the learning rates go down, and 
the collapse continues to get worse,   and then everything deteriorates.
Have you seen this super interesting   paper that dreaming is a way of preventing 
this kind of overfitting and collapse?  The reason dreaming is evolutionary adaptive 
is to put you in weird situations that are   very unlike your day-to-day reality, so 
as to prevent this kind of overfitting.  It's an interesting idea. I do think 
that when you're generating things   in your head and then you're attending to 
it, you're training on your own samples,   you're training on your synthetic data.
If you do it for too long,   you go off-rails and you collapse way too much.
You always have to seek entropy in your life.  Talking to other people is a great 
source of entropy, and things like that.  So maybe the brain has also built some internal 
mechanisms for increasing the amount of entropy   in that process. That's an interesting idea.
This is a very ill-formed thought so I’ll   just put it out and let you react to it.
The best learners that we are aware of,   which are children, are extremely 
bad at recollecting information.  In fact, at the very earliest stages of 
childhood, you will forget everything.  You're just an amnesiac about everything 
that happens before a certain year date.  But you're extremely good at picking up 
new languages and learning from the world.  Maybe there's some element of being 
able to see the forest for the trees.  Whereas if you compare it to the opposite end 
of the spectrum, you have LLM pre-training,   where these models will literally be 
able to regurgitate word-for-word what   is the next thing in a Wikipedia page.
But their ability to learn abstract   concepts really quickly, the way 
a child can, is much more limited.  Then adults are somewhere in between, where 
they don't have the flexibility of childhood   learning, but they can memorize facts and 
information in a way that is harder for kids.  I don't know if there's something 
interesting about that spectrum.  I think there's something very 
interesting about that, 100%.  I do think that humans have a lot more of 
an element, compared to LLMs, of seeing   the forest for the trees.
We're not actually that good   at memorization, which is actually a feature.
Because we're not that good at memorization, we're   forced to find patterns in a more general sense.
LLMs in comparison are extremely good   at memorization.
They will recite   passages from all these training sources.
You can give them completely nonsensical data.  You can hash some amount of text or something 
like that, you get a completely random sequence.  If you train on it, even just for a single 
iteration or two, it can suddenly regurgitate   the entire thing. It will memorize it. 
There's no way a person can read a single   sequence of random numbers and recite it to you.
That's a feature, not a bug, because it forces   you to only learn the generalizable components.
Whereas LLMs are distracted by all the memory   that they have of the pre-training 
documents, and it's probably very   distracting to them in a certain sense.
So that's why when I talk about the   cognitive core, I want to remove the 
memory, which is what we talked about.  I'd love to have them have less memory 
so that they have to look things up,   and they only maintain the algorithms for 
thought, and the idea of an experiment,   and all this cognitive glue of acting.
And this is also relevant to preventing   model collapse?
Let me think. I'm   not sure. It's almost like a separate axis.
The models are way too good at memorization,   and somehow we should remove that.
People are much worse, but it's a good thing.  What is a solution to model collapse?
There are very naive things you could attempt.  The distribution over logits 
should be wider or something.  There are many naive things you could try.
What ends up being the problem   with the naive approaches?
That's a great question. You can imagine having   a regularization for entropy and things like that.
I guess they just don't work as well empirically   because right now the models are collapsed.
But I will say most of the tasks that we   want from them don't actually demand diversity.
That’s probably the answer to what's going on.  The frontier labs are trying 
to make the models useful.  I feel like the diversity of 
the outputs is not so much...  Number one, it's much harder to work with and 
evaluate and all this stuff, but maybe it's not   what's capturing most of the value.
In fact, it's actively penalized.   If you're super creative in RL, it's not good.
Yeah. Or maybe if you're doing a lot of writing,   help from LLMs and stuff like that, it's probably 
bad because the models will silently give   you all the same stuff.
They won't explore lots   of different ways of answering a question.
Maybe this diversity, not as many applications   need it so the models don't have it.
But then it's a problem at   synthetic data generation time, et cetera.
So we're shooting ourselves in the foot by not   allowing this entropy to maintain in the model.
Possibly the labs should try harder.  I think you hinted that it's a very 
fundamental problem, it won't be easy   to solve. What's your intuition for that?
I don't know if it's super fundamental.  I don't know if I intended to say that.
I do think that I haven't done these experiments,   but I do think that you could probably 
regularize the entropy to be higher.  So you're encouraging the model to give you more 
and more solutions, but you don't want it to   start deviating too much from the training data.
It's going to start making up its own language.  It's going to start using words that are 
extremely rare, so it's going to drift too   much from the distribution.
So I think controlling   the distribution is just tricky.
It's probably not trivial in that sense.  How many bits should the optimal core 
of intelligence end up being if you   just had to make a guess?
The thing we put on the   von Neumann probes, how big does it have to be?
It's really interesting in the history of the   field because at one point everything was 
very scaling-pilled in terms of like, "Oh,   we're gonna make much bigger models, 
trillions of parameter models."  What the models have done in size 
is they've gone up and now they've   come down. State-of-the-art models are smaller. 
Even then, I think they memorized way too much.  So I had a prediction a while back that I almost 
feel like we can get cognitive cores that are   very good at even a billion parameters.
If you talk to a billion parameter model,   I think in 20 years, you can have 
a very productive conversation.  It thinks and it's a lot more like a human.
But if you ask it some factual question, it might   have to look it up, but it knows that it doesn't 
know and it might have to look it up and it will   just do all the reasonable things.
That's surprising that you think   it'll take a billion parameters.
Because already we have billion   parameter models or a couple billion 
parameter models that are very intelligent.  Well, state-of-the-art models 
are like a trillion parameters.  But they remember so much stuff.
Yeah, but I'm surprised that in 10 years,   given the pace… We have gpt-oss-20b.
That's way better than GPT-4 original,   which was a trillion plus parameters.
Given that trend, I'm surprised you   think in 10 years the cognitive 
core is still a billion parameters.  I'm surprised you're not like, "Oh it's 
gonna be like tens of millions or millions."  Here's the issue, the training data is 
the internet, which is really terrible.  There's a huge amount of gains to be 
made because the internet is terrible.  Even the internet, when you and I think of 
the internet, you're thinking of like The   Wall Street Journal. That's not what this 
is. When you're looking at a pre-training   dataset in the frontier lab and you look at a 
random internet document, it's total garbage.  I don't even know how this works at all.
It's some like stock tickers, symbols,   it's a huge amount of slop and garbage 
from like all the corners of the internet.  It's not like your Wall Street Journal 
article, that's extremely rare.  So because the internet is so terrible, we have 
to build really big models to compress all that.  Most of that compression is memory 
work instead of cognitive work.  But what we really want is the 
cognitive part, delete the memory.  I guess what I'm saying is that we need 
intelligent models to help us refine even   the pre-training set to just narrow 
it down to the cognitive components.  Then I think you get away with a 
much smaller model because it's a   much better dataset and you could train it on it.
But probably it's not trained directly on it, it's   probably distilled from a much better model still.
But why is the distilled version still a billion?  I just feel like distillation 
works extremely well.  So almost every small model, if you have a 
small model, it's almost certainly distilled.  Right, but why is the distillation in 
10 years not getting below 1 billion?  Oh, you think it should be smaller than a 
billion? I mean, come on, right? I don't   know. At some point it should take at least 
a billion knobs to do something interesting.  You're thinking it should be even smaller?
Yeah. If you look at the trend over the last   few years of just finding low-hanging fruit and 
going from trillion plus models to models that   are literally two orders of magnitude smaller in a 
matter of two years and having better performance,   it makes me think the sort of core of 
intelligence might be even way, way smaller.  Plenty of room at the bottom, 
to paraphrase Feynman.  I feel like I'm already contrarian 
by talking about a billion parameter   cognitive core and you're outdoing me.
Maybe we could get a little bit smaller.  I do think that practically speaking, you 
want the model to have some knowledge.  You don't want it to be looking up everything 
because then you can't think in your head.  You're looking up way too much stuff all the time.  Some basic curriculum needs to be there for 
knowledge, but it doesn't have esoteric knowledge.  We're discussing what plausibly 
could be the cognitive core.  There's a separate question which is what 
will be the size of frontier models over time?  I'm curious if you have predictions.
We had increasing scale up to maybe GPT 4.5 and   now we're seeing decreasing or plateauing scale.
There are many reasons this could be going on.  Do you have a prediction going forward?
Will the biggest models be bigger,   will they be smaller, will they be the same?
I don't have a super strong prediction.  The labs are just being practical.
They have a flops budget and a cost budget.  It just turns out that pre-training is not where 
you want to put most of your flops or your cost.  That's why the models have gotten smaller.
They are a bit smaller, the pre-training   stage is smaller, but they make 
it up in reinforcement learning,   mid-training, and all this stuff that follows.
They're just being practical in terms of all the   stages and how you get the most bang for the buck.
Forecasting that trend is quite hard.  I do still expect that there's so much 
low-hanging fruit. That's my basic expectation.   I have a very wide distribution here.
Do you expect the low-hanging fruit to be   similar in kind to the kinds of things that have 
been happening over the last two to five years?  If I look at nanochat versus nanoGPT 
and the architectural tweaks you made,   is that the flavor of things you 
expect to continue to keep happening?  You're not expecting any giant paradigm shifts.
For the most part, yeah. I expect the   datasets to get much, much better.
When you look at the average datasets,   they're extremely terrible.
They’re so bad that I   don't even know how anything works.
Look at the average example in the training set:   factual mistakes, errors, nonsensical things.
Somehow when you do it at scale,   the noise washes away and you're left with 
some of the signal. Datasets will improve   a ton. Everything gets better. Our hardware, 
all the kernels for running the hardware and   maximizing what you get with the hardware.
Nvidia is slowly tuning the hardware itself,   Tensor Cores, all that needs to 
happen and will continue to happen.  All the kernels will get better and 
utilize the chip to the max extent.  All the algorithms will probably improve over 
optimization, architecture, and all the modeling   components of how everything is done and what 
the algorithms are that we're even training with.  I do expect that nothing dominates. Everything 
plus 20%. This is roughly what I've seen.  People have proposed different ways of charting 
how much progress we've made towards full AGI.  If you can come up with some line, then you 
can see where that line intersects with AGI   and where that would happen on the x-axis.
People have proposed it's the education level.  We had a high schooler, and then they went to 
college with RL, and they're going to get a Ph.D.  I don't like that one.
Or they'll propose horizon   length. Maybe they can do tasks that take 
a minute, they can do those autonomously.  Then they can autonomously do tasks that take 
an hour, a human an hour, a human a week.  How do you think about the relevant y-axis here?
How should we think about how   AI is making progress?
I have two answers to that.  Number one, I'm almost tempted to 
reject the question entirely because   I see this as an extension of computing.
Have we talked about how to chart progress   in computing, or how do you chart progress 
in computing since the 1970s or whatever?   What is the y-axis? The whole question is 
funny from that perspective a little bit.  When people talk about AI and the original AGI 
and how we spoke about it when OpenAI started,   AGI was a system you could go to that can do any 
economically valuable task at human performance   or better. That was the definition. I 
was pretty happy with that at the time.  I've stuck to that definition forever, and 
then people have made up all kinds of other   definitions. But I like that definition. The first 
concession that people make all the time is they   just take out all the physical stuff because 
we're just talking about digital knowledge work.  That's a pretty major concession compared to 
the original definition, which was any task   a human can do. I can lift things, etc. AI 
can't do that, obviously, but we'll take it.  What fraction of the economy are we taking away 
by saying, "Oh, only knowledge work?" I don't know   the numbers. I feel about 10% to 20%, if I had to 
guess, is only knowledge work, someone could work   from home and perform tasks, something like that.
It's still a really large market.  What is the size of the 
economy, and what is 10% or 20%?  We're still talking about a few trillion 
dollars, even in the US, of market share or work.  So it's still a very massive bucket.
Going back to the definition,   what I would be looking for is to 
what extent is that definition true?  Are there jobs or lots of tasks?
If we think of tasks as not jobs but tasks.  It's difficult because the problem is society will 
refactor based on the tasks that make up jobs,   based on what's automatable or not.
Today, what jobs are replaceable by AI?  A good example recently was Geoff Hinton's 
prediction that radiologists would not be   a job anymore, and this turned out 
to be very wrong in a bunch of ways.  Radiologists are alive and well and growing, 
even though computer vision is really,   really good at recognizing all the different 
things that they have to recognize in images.  It's just a messy, complicated job with a 
lot of surfaces and dealing with patients   and all this stuff in the context of it.
I don't know that by that definition   AI has made a huge dent yet.
Some of the jobs that I would   be looking for have some features that make it 
very amenable to automation earlier than later.  As an example, call center employees 
often come up, and I think rightly so.  Call center employees have a number of simplifying 
properties with respect to what's automatable   today. Their jobs are pretty simple. It's a 
sequence of tasks, and every task looks similar.  You take a phone call with a person, it's 
10 minutes of interaction or whatever it is,   probably a bit longer.
In my experience, a lot longer.  You complete some task in some scheme, 
and you change some database entries   around or something like that.
So you keep repeating something   over and over again, and that's your job.
You do want to bring in the task horizon—how   long it takes to perform a task—and 
then you want to also remove context.  You're not dealing with different parts of 
services of companies or other customers.  It's just the database, you, 
and a person you're serving.  It's more closed, it's more 
understandable, it's purely digital.  So I would be looking for those things.
But even there, I'm not looking   at full automation yet.
I'm looking for an autonomy slider.  I expect that we are not going 
to instantly replace people.  We're going to be swapping in 
AIs that do 80% of the volume.  They delegate 20% of the volume to humans, 
and humans are supervising teams of five AIs   doing the call center work that's more rote.
I would be looking for new interfaces or new   companies that provide some 
layer that allows you to manage   some of these AIs that are not yet perfect.
Then I would expect that across the economy.  A lot of jobs are a lot harder 
than a call center employee.  With radiologists, I'm totally 
speculating and I have no idea what   the actual workflow of a radiologist involves.
But one analogy that might be applicable is when   Waymos were first being rolled out, there'd be a 
person sitting in the front seat, and you just had   to have them there to make sure that if something 
went really wrong, they're there to monitor.  Even today, people are still watching 
to make sure things are going well.  Robotaxi, which was just deployed, 
still has a person inside it.  Now we could be in a similar situation where 
if you automate 99% of a job, that last 1%   the human has to do is incredibly valuable 
because it's bottlenecking everything else.  If it were the case with radiologists, where 
the person sitting in the front of Waymo has   to be specially trained for years in order 
to provide the last 1%, their wages should   go up tremendously because they're the 
one thing bottlenecking wide deployment.  Radiologists, I think their wages have 
gone up for similar reasons, if you're   the last bottleneck and you're not fungible.
A Waymo driver might be fungible with others.  So you might see this thing where your wages 
go up until you get to 99% and then fall just   like that when the last 1% is gone.
And I wonder if we're seeing similar   things with radiology or salaries of call 
center workers or anything like that.  That's an interesting question. I don't think 
we're currently seeing that with radiology.  I think radiology is not a good example.
I don't know why Geoff Hinton picked   on radiology because I think it's an 
extremely messy, complicated profession.  I would be a lot more interested in what's 
happening with call center employees today,   for example, because I would expect a lot 
of the rote stuff to be automatable today.  I don't have first-level access to it but 
I would be looking for trends of what's   happening with the call center employees.
Some of the things I would also expect   is that maybe they are swapping in AI, but 
then I would still wait for a year or two   because I would potentially expect them to 
pull back and rehire some of the people.  There's been evidence that that's already been 
happening generally in companies that have been   adopting AI, which I think is quite surprising.
I also found what was really surprising. AGI,   right? A thing which would do everything.
We'll take out physical work,   but it should be able to do all knowledge work.
What you would have naively anticipated is that   the way this progression would happen is 
that you take a little task that a consultant   is doing, you take that out of the bucket.
You take a little task that an accountant is   doing, you take that out of the bucket.
Then you're just doing this   across all knowledge work.
But instead, if we do believe we're   on the path of AGI with the current paradigm, 
the progression is very much not like that.  It does not seem like consultants and accountants 
are getting huge productivity improvements.  It's very much like programmers are getting 
more and more chiseled away at their work.  If you look at the revenues of these companies, 
discounting normal chat revenue—which is similar   to Google or something—just looking at 
API revenues, it's dominated by coding.  So this thing which is "general", which 
should be able to do any knowledge work,   is just overwhelmingly doing only coding.
It's a surprising way that you would   expect the AGI to be deployed.
There's an interesting point   here. I do believe coding is the perfect 
first thing for these LLMs and agents.  That’s because coding has always 
fundamentally worked around text.  It's computer terminals and text, 
and everything is based around text.  LLMs, the way they're trained 
on the Internet, love text.  They're perfect text processors, and there's 
all this data out there. It's a perfect fit.   We also have a lot of infrastructure 
pre-built for handling code and text.  For example, we have Visual Studio Code 
or your favorite IDE showing you code,   and an agent can plug into that.
If an agent has a diff where it made some change,   we suddenly have all this code already that shows 
all the differences to a code base using a diff.  It's almost like we've pre-built a 
lot of the infrastructure for code.  Contrast that with some of the 
things that don't enjoy that at all.  As an example, there are people trying to build 
automation not for coding, but for slides.  I saw a company doing slides. That's 
much, much harder. The reason it's   much harder is because slides are not text.
Slides are little graphics, they're arranged   spatially, and there's a visual component to it.
Slides don't have this pre-built infrastructure.  For example, if an agent is to make a change to 
your slides, how does a thing show you the diff?  How do you see the diff?
There's nothing that shows diffs   for slides. Someone has to build it. Some of these 
things are not amenable to AIs as they are, which   are text processors, and code surprisingly is.
I’m not sure that alone explains it.  I personally have tried to get LLMs to be useful 
in domains which are just pure language-in,   language-out, like rewriting transcripts, 
coming up with clips based on transcripts.  It's very plausible that I didn't do 
every single possible thing I could do.  I put a bunch of good examples in context, but 
maybe I should have done some kind of fine-tuning.  Our mutual friend, Andy Matuschak, told me that 
he tried 50 billion things to try to get models   to be good at writing spaced repetition prompts.
Again, very much language-in, language-out tasks,   the kind of thing that should be dead 
center in the repertoire of these LLMs.  He tried in-context learning 
with a few-shot examples.  He tried supervised fine-tuning and retrieval.
He could not get them to make   cards to his satisfaction.
So I find it striking that even in language-out   domains, it's very hard to get a lot of economic 
value out of these models separate from coding.  I don't know what explains it.
That makes sense. I'm not   saying that anything text is trivial.
I do think that code is pretty structured.  Text is maybe a lot more flowery, and there's 
a lot more entropy in text, I would say.  I don't know how else to put it.
Also code is hard, and so people feel quite   empowered by LLMs, even from simple knowledge.
I don't know that I have a very good answer.  Obviously, text makes it much, much easier, 
but it doesn't mean that all text is trivial.  How do you think about superintelligence?
Do you expect it to feel qualitatively different   from normal humans or human companies?
I see it as a progression   of automation in society.
Extrapolating the trend of computing, there will   be a gradual automation of a lot of things, and 
superintelligence will an extrapolation of that.  We expect more and more autonomous 
entities over time that are doing a lot   of the digital work and then eventually even 
the physical work some amount of time later.  Basically I see it as just 
automation, roughly speaking.  But automation includes the things humans 
can already do, and superintelligence   implies things humans can’t do.
But one of the things that people   do is invent new things, which I would just 
put into the automation if that makes sense.  But I guess, less abstractly and more 
qualitatively, do you expect something   to feel like… Because this thing can either think 
so fast, or has so many copies, or the copies can   merge back into themselves, or is much smarter, 
any number of advantages an AI might have, will   the civilization in which these AIs exist
just feel qualitatively different from humans?  I think it will. It is fundamentally automation, 
but it will be extremely foreign. It will look   really strange. Like you mentioned, we can run 
all of this on a computer cluster and much faster.  Some of the scenarios that I start to get 
nervous about when the world looks like   that is this gradual loss of control 
and understanding of what's happening.  I think that's the most likely outcome, that 
there will be a gradual loss of understanding.  We'll gradually layer all this stuff 
everywhere, and there will be fewer   and fewer people who understand it.
Then there will be a gradual loss of   control and understanding of what's happening.
That to me seems the most likely outcome of how   all this stuff will go down.
Let me probe on that a bit.  It's not clear to me that loss of control and 
loss of understanding are the same things.  A board of directors at TSMC, Intel—name a random 
company—they're just prestigious 80-year-olds.  They have very little understanding, and maybe 
they don't practically actually have control.  A better example   is the President of the United States.
The President has a lot of fucking power.  I'm not trying to make a good statement 
about the current operant, or maybe I am,   but the actual level of understanding is 
very different from the level of control.  I think that's fair. That's a good 
pushback. I think I expect loss of both.  How come? Loss of understanding is 
obvious, but why loss of control?  We're really far into a territory where I 
don't know what this looks like, but if I   were to write sci-fi novels, they would look along 
the lines of not even a single entity that takes   over everything, but multiple competing entities 
that gradually become more and more autonomous.  Some of them go rogue and 
the others fight them off.  It's this hot pot of completely autonomous 
activity that we've delegated to.  I feel it would have that flavor.
It is not the fact that they are smarter   than us that is resulting in the loss of control.
It's the fact that they are competing with each   other, and whatever arises out of that 
competition leads to the loss of control.  A lot of these things, they will be 
tools to people, they're acting on   behalf of people or something like that.
So maybe those people are in control,   but maybe it's a loss of control overall for 
society in the sense of outcomes we want.  You have entities acting on behalf of individuals 
that are still roughly seen as out of control.  This is a question I should have asked earlier.
We were talking about how currently it feels like   when you're doing AI engineering or AI research, 
these models are more in the category of compiler   rather than in the category of a replacement.
At some point, if you have AGI,   it should be able to do what you do.
Do you feel like having a million   copies of you in parallel results in 
some huge speed-up of AI progress?  If that does happen, do you expect to see an 
intelligence explosion once we have a true AGI?  I'm not talking about LLMs today.
I do, but it's business as usual because   we're in an intelligence explosion 
already and have been for decades.  It's basically the GDP curve that is 
an exponential weighted sum over so   many aspects of the industry.
Everything is gradually being   automated and has been for hundreds of years.
The Industrial Revolution is automation and   some of the physical components and 
tool building and all this stuff.  Compilers are early software 
automation, et cetera.  We've been recursively self-improving 
and exploding for a long time.  Another way to see it is that Earth was a pretty 
boring place if you don't look at the biomechanics   and so on, and looked very similar.
If you look from space, we're in the   middle of this firecracker event, 
but we're seeing it in slow motion.  I definitely feel like this has 
already happened for a very long time.  Again, I don't see AI as a distinct 
technology with respect to what has   already been happening for a long time.
You think it's continuous with this   hyper-exponential trend?
Yes. That's why this was   very interesting to me, because I was 
trying to find AI in the GDP for a while.  I thought that GDP should go up.
But then I looked at some of the   other technologies that I thought 
were very transformative, like   computers or mobile phones or et cetera.
You can't find them in GDP. GDP is the same   exponential. Even the early iPhone didn't have the 
App Store, and it didn't have a lot of the bells   and whistles that the modern iPhone has.
So even though we think of 2008,   when the iPhone came out, as this major 
seismic change, it's actually not.  Everything is so spread out and it so 
slowly diffuses that everything ends up   being averaged up into the same exponential.
It's the exact same thing with computers.  You can't find them in the GDP 
like, "Oh, we have computers now."  That's not what happened, because 
it's such slow progression.  With AI we're going to see the exact same thing. 
It's just more automation. It allows us to write   different kinds of programs that we couldn't write 
before, but AI is still fundamentally a program.  It's a new kind of computer and 
a new kind of computing system.  But it has all these problems, 
it's going to diffuse over time,   and it's still going to add 
up to the same exponential.  We're still going to have an exponential 
that's going to get extremely vertical.  It's going to be very foreign to 
live in that kind of an environment.  Are you saying that, if you look at the trend 
before the Industrial Revolution to now,   you have a hyper-exponential where you go 
from 0% growth to then 10,000 years ago,   0.02% growth, and to now when we're at 2% 
growth. That's a hyper-exponential. Are you   saying if you're charting AI on there, then 
AI takes you to 20% growth or 200% growth?  Or are you saying that if you look at 
the last 300 years, what you've been   seeing is that you have technology after 
technology—computers, electrification,   steam engines, railways, et cetera—but the 
rate of growth is the exact same, it's 2%.  Are you saying the rate of growth will go up?
The rate of growth has also stayed   roughly constant, right?
Only over the last 200, 300 years.  But over the course of 
human history it's exploded.  It's gone from 0% to faster, faster, 
faster. Industrial explosion, 2%.  For a while I tried to find AI 
or look for AI in the GDP curve,   and I've convinced myself that this is false.
Even when people talk about recursive   self-improvement and labs and stuff 
like that, this is business as usual.  Of course it's going to recursively self-improve, 
and it's been recursively self-improving.  LLMs allow the engineers to work much more 
efficiently to build the next round of LLM,   and a lot more of the components are 
being automated and tuned and et cetera.  All the engineers having access 
to Google Search is part of it.  All the engineers having an IDE, all of them 
having autocomplete or having Claude code,   et cetera, it's all just part of the same 
speed-up of the whole thing. It's just so smooth.  Just to clarify, you're saying that 
the rate of growth will not change.  The intelligence explosion will show up as 
it just enabled us to continue staying on the   2% growth trajectory, just as the Internet 
helped us stay on the 2% growth trajectory.  Yes, my expectation is that 
it stays in the same pattern.  Just to throw the opposite argument against you, 
my expectation is that it blows up because I think   true AGI—and I'm not talking about LLM coding 
bots, I'm talking about actual replacement of a   human in a server—is qualitatively different 
from these other productivity-improving   technologies because it's labor itself.
I think we live in a very labor-constrained world.  If you talk to any startup founder or any person, 
you can be like, what do you need more of? You   need really talented people. And if you have 
billions of extra people who are inventing stuff,   integrating themselves, making companies bottom 
start to finish, that feels qualitatively   different from a single technology.
It's as if you get 10 billion   extra people on the planet.
Maybe a counterpoint. I'm pretty willing   to be convinced one way or another on this point.
But I will say, for example, computing is labor.   Computing was labor. Computers, a lot 
of jobs disappeared because computers   are automating a bunch of digital information 
processing that you now don't need a human for.  So computers are labor, and that has played out.
Self-driving as an example is also computers doing   labor. That's already been playing 
out. It's still business as usual.  You have a machine which is spitting out more 
things like that at potentially faster pace.  Historically, we have examples 
of the growth regime changing   where you went from 0.2% growth to 2% growth.
It seems very plausible to me that a machine which   is then spitting out the next self-driving 
car and the next Internet and whatever…  I see where it's coming from.
At the same time, I do feel like   people make this assumption of, "We 
have God in a box, and now it can do   everything," and it just won't look like that.
It's going to be able to do some of the things.  It's going to fail at some other things.
It's going to be gradually put into society,   and we'll end up with the same pattern. That 
is my prediction. This assumption of suddenly   having a completely intelligent, fully flexible, 
fully general human in a box, and we can dispense   it at arbitrary problems in society, I don't 
think that we will have this discrete change.  I think we'll arrive at the same kind of 
gradual diffusion of this across the industry.  It often ends up being misleading 
in these conversations.  I don't like to use the word intelligence in 
this context because intelligence implies you   think there'll be a single superintelligence 
sitting in a server and it'll divine how   to come up with new technologies and 
inventions that cause this explosion.  That's not what I'm imagining 
when I'm imagining 20% growth.  I'm imagining that there are billions of 
very smart human-like minds, potentially,   or that's all that's required.
But the fact that there's hundreds   of millions of them, billions of them, each 
individually making new products, figuring   out how to integrate themselves into the economy.
If a highly experienced smart immigrant came to   the country, you wouldn't need to figure out how 
we integrate them in the economy. They figure it   out. They could start a company, they could make 
inventions, or increase productivity in the world.  We have examples, even in the current regime, 
of places that have had 10-20% economic growth.  If you just have a lot of people and 
less capital in comparison to the people,   you can have Hong Kong or Shenzhen or 
whatever with decades of 10% plus growth.  There's a lot of really smart people who are 
ready to make use of the resources and do   this period of catch-up because we've had this 
discontinuity, and I think AI might be similar.  I understand, but I still think that 
you're presupposing some discrete jump.  There's some unlock that we're waiting to claim.
And suddenly we're going to have   geniuses in data centers.
I still think you're presupposing   some discrete jump that has no historical 
precedent that I can't find in any of the   statistics and that I think probably won't happen.
I mean, the Industrial Revolution is such a jump.  You went from 0.2% growth to 2% growth.
I'm just saying you'll see another jump like that.  I'm a little bit suspicious, 
I would have to take a look.  For example, some of the logs are not very 
good from before the Industrial Revolution.  I'm a bit suspicious of it but 
I don't have strong opinions.  You're saying that this was a singular 
event that was extremely magical.  You're saying that maybe there's going 
to be another event that's going to   be just like that, extremely magical.
It will break the paradigm, and so on.  I actually don't think… The crucial thing with the 
Industrial Revolution was that it was not magical.  If you just zoomed in, what you would see in 1770 
or 1870 is not that there was some key invention.  But at the same time, you did move the 
economy to a regime where the progress   was much faster and the exponential 10x'd.
I expect a similar thing from AI where it's   not like there's going to be a single moment 
where we've made the crucial invention.  It’s an overhang that's being unlocked.
Like maybe there's a new energy source.  There's some unlock—in this case, some kind of 
a cognitive capacity—and there's an overhang of   cognitive work to do.
That's right.  You're expecting that overhang to be filled by 
this new technology when it crosses the threshold.  Maybe one way to think about it is 
throughout history, a lot of growth   comes because people come up with ideas, 
and then people are out there doing stuff to   execute those ideas and make valuable output.
Through most of this time, the population has   been exploding. That has been driving 
growth. For the last 50 years, people   have argued that growth has stagnated.
The population in frontier countries   has also stagnated.
I think we go back to   the exponential growth in population that 
causes hyper-exponential growth in output.  It's really hard to tell. I 
understand that viewpoint. I   don't intuitively feel that viewpoint.
You recommended Nick Lane's book to me.  On that basis, I also found it super 
interesting and I interviewed him.  I have some questions about thinking about 
intelligence and evolutionary history.  Now that you, over the last 20 years of doing AI 
research, you maybe have a more tangible sense of   what intelligence is, what it takes to develop it.
Are you more or less surprised as a result that   evolution just spontaneously stumbled upon it?
I love Nick Lane's books. I was just listening   to his podcast on the way up here.
With respect to intelligence and its   evolution, it's very, very recent.
I am surprised that it evolved.  I find it fascinating to think 
about all the worlds out there.  Say there's a thousand planets 
like Earth and what they look like.  I think Nick Lane was here talking 
about some of the earliest parts.  He expects very similar life 
forms, roughly speaking,   and bacteria-like things in most of them.
There are a few breaks in there.  The evolution of intelligence intuitively feels 
to me like it should be a fairly rare event.  Maybe you should base it on 
how long something has existed.  If bacteria were around for 2 billion years 
and nothing happened, then going to eukaryote   is probably pretty hard because bacteria came 
up quite early in Earth's evolution or history.  How long have we had animals?
Maybe a couple hundred million years,   multicellular animals that 
run around, crawl, et cetera.  That’s maybe 10% of Earth's lifespan.
Maybe on that timescale it's not too tricky.  It's still surprising to me, 
intuitively, that it developed.  I would maybe expect just a lot of animal-like 
life forms doing animal-like things.  The fact that you can get something 
that creates culture and knowledge   and accumulates it is surprising to me.
There's a couple of interesting follow-ups.  If you buy the Sutton perspective that the 
crux of intelligence is animal intelligence…   The quote he said is "If you got to the 
squirrel, you'd be most of the way to AGI."  We got to squirrel intelligence right after 
the Cambrian explosion 600 million years ago.  It seems like what instigated that was the 
oxygenation event 600 million years ago.  But immediately the intelligence algorithm 
was there to make the squirrel intelligence.  It's suggestive that animal 
intelligence was like that.  As soon as you had the oxygen in the 
environment, you had the eukaryote,   you could just get the algorithm.
Maybe it was an accident that   evolution stumbled upon it so fast, 
but I don't know if that suggests that   at the end it's going to be quite simple.
It's so hard to tell with any of this stuff.  You can base it a bit on how long 
something has existed or how long   it feels like something has been bottlenecked.
Nick Lane is very good about describing this very   apparent bottleneck in bacteria and archaea.
For two billion years, nothing happened.  There’s extreme diversity of biochemistry, 
and yet nothing grows to become animals.   Two billion years. I don't know that we've 
seen exactly that kind of an equivalent with   animals and intelligence, to your point.
We could also look at it with respect   to how many times we think certain 
intelligence has individually sprung up.  That's a really good thing to investigate.
One thought on that. There's hominid intelligence,   and then there's bird intelligence.
Ravens, etc., are extremely clever,   but their brain parts are quite distinct, 
and we don't have that much in common.  That's a slight indication of maybe 
intelligence springing up a few times.  In that case, you'd expect it more frequently.
A former guest, Gwern, and Carl Shulman, they’ve   made a really interesting point about that.
Their perspective is that the scalable algorithm   which humans have and primates have, arose in 
birds as well, and maybe other times as well.  But humans found an evolutionary niche which 
rewarded marginal increases in intelligence   and also had a scalable brain algorithm that 
could achieve those increases in intelligence.  For example, if a bird had a bigger brain, 
it would just collapse out of the air.  It's very smart for the size of 
its brain, but it's not in a niche   which rewards the brain getting bigger.
It’s maybe similar to some really smart…  Like dolphins?
Exaclty, humans, we have hands that   reward being able to learn how to do tool use.
We can externalize digestion, more energy to   the brain, and that kicks off the flywheel.
Also stuff to work with. I'm guessing it would   be harder if I were a dolphin. How do you have 
fire? The universe of things you can do in water,   inside water, is probably lower than 
what you can do on land, just chemically.  I do agree with this viewpoint of these niches 
and what's being incentivized. I still find it   miraculous. I would have expected things to 
get stuck on animals with bigger muscles.  Going through intelligence is a 
really fascinating breaking point.  The way Gwern put it is the reason it was so hard 
is that it's a very tight line between being in   a situation where something is so important 
to learn that it's not worth distilling the   exact right circuits directly back into your DNA, 
versus it's not important enough to learn at all.  It has to be something that incentivizes 
building the algorithm to learn in a lifetime.  You have to incentivize some kind of adaptability.
You want environments that are unpredictable   so evolution can't bake your 
algorithms into your weights.  A lot of animals are pre-baked in this sense.
Humans have to figure it out at test   time when they get born.
You want these environments   that change really rapidly, where you 
can't foresee what will work well.  You create intelligence to 
figure it out at test time.  Quintin Pope had this interesting blog post 
where he's saying the reason he doesn't   expect a sharp takeoff is that humans had the 
sharp takeoff where 60,000 years ago we seem   to have had the cognitive architectures 
that we have today. 10,000 years ago,   agricultural revolution, modernity.
What was happening in that 50,000 years?  You had to build this cultural scaffold where 
you can accumulate knowledge over generations.  This is an ability that exists for 
free in the way we do AI training.  In many cases they are literally distilled.
If you retrain a model, they can be trained   on each other, they can be trained 
on the same pre-training corpus,   they don't literally have to start from scratch.
There's a sense in which it took humans a long   time to get this cultural loop going, but it just 
comes for free with the way we do LLM training.  Yes and no. Because LLMs don't really 
have the equivalent of culture.  Maybe we're giving them way too 
much and incentivizing not to   create it or something like that.
But the invention of culture and of   written record and of passing down notes 
between each other, I don't think there's   an equivalent of that with LLMs right now.
LLMs don't really have culture right now and   it's one of the impediments I would say.
Can you give me some sense of what   LLM culture might look like?
In the simplest case it would be a   giant scratchpad that the LLM can edit and as it's 
reading stuff or as it's helping out with work,   it's editing the scratchpad for itself.
Why can't an LLM write a book for the other   LLMs? That would be cool. Why can't other 
LLMs read this LLM's book and be inspired   by it or shocked by it or something like that?
There's no equivalence for any of this stuff.  Interesting. When would you expect 
that kind of thing to start happening?  Also, multi-agent systems and a sort of 
independent AI civilization and culture?  There are two powerful ideas in the 
realm of multi-agent that have both   not been really claimed or so on.
The first one I would say is culture   and LLMs having a growing repertoire 
of knowledge for their own purposes.  The second one looks a lot more 
like the powerful idea of self-play.  In my mind it’s extremely powerful.
Evolution has a lot of competition   driving intelligence and evolution.
In AlphaGo more algorithmically,   AlphaGo is playing against itself and that's 
how it learns to get really good at Go.  There's no equivalent of self-playing LLMs, 
but I would expect that to also exist.  No one has done it yet.
Why can't an LLM for example, create a bunch   of problems that another LLM is learning to solve?
Then the LLM is always trying to serve more and   more difficult problems, stuff like that.
There's a bunch of ways to organize it.  It's a realm of research, but I haven't 
seen anything that convincingly claims   both of those multi-agent improvements.
We're mostly in the realm of a single   individual agent, but that will change.
In the realm of culture also,   I would also bucket organizations.
We haven't seen anything like that convincingly   either. That's why we're still early.
Can you identify the key bottleneck   that's preventing this kind 
of collaboration between LLMs?  Maybe the way I would put it is, 
some of these analogies work and   they shouldn't, but somehow, remarkably, they do.
A lot of the smaller models, or the dumber models,   remarkably resemble a kindergarten student, or an 
elementary school student or high school student.  Somehow, we still haven't graduated 
enough where this stuff can take over.  My Claude Code or Codex, they still 
feel like this elementary-grade student.  I know that they can take PhD quizzes, 
but they still cognitively feel like a   kindergarten or an elementary school student.
I don't think they can create culture because   they're still kids. They're savant kids. 
They have perfect memory of all this stuff.  They can convincingly create all 
kinds of slop that looks really good.  But I still think they don't really know 
what they're doing and they don't really   have the cognition across all these little 
checkboxes that we still have to collect.  You've talked about how you were at Tesla 
leading self-driving from 2017 to 2022.  And you firsthand saw this progress from cool 
demos to now thousands of cars out there actually   autonomously doing drives.
Why did that take a decade?  What was happening through that time?
One thing I will almost instantly push   back on is that this is not even near done, 
in a bunch of ways that I'm going to get to.  Self-driving is very interesting because 
it's definitely where I get a lot of my   intuitions because I spent five years on it.
It has this entire history where the first demos   of self-driving go all the way to the 1980s.
You can see a demo from CMU in 1986.  There's a truck that's driving itself on 
roads. Fast forward. When I was joining Tesla,   I had a very early demo of Waymo.
It basically gave me a perfect drive   in 2014 or something like that, so 
a perfect Waymo drive a decade ago.  It took us around Palo Alto and so on 
because I had a friend who worked there.  I thought it was very close and 
then it still took a long time.  For some kinds of tasks and jobs and so on, 
there's a very large demo-to-product gap where the   demo is very easy, but the product is very hard.
It's especially the case in cases like   self-driving where the cost 
of failure is too high.  Many industries, tasks, and jobs maybe don't have 
that property, but when you do have that property,   that definitely increases the timelines.
For example, in software engineering,   I do think that property does exist.
For a lot of vibe coding, it doesn't.  But if you're writing actual production-grade 
code, that property should exist, because any   kind of mistake leads to a security 
vulnerability or something like that.  Millions and hundreds of millions of 
people's personal Social Security numbers   get leaked or something like that.
So in software, people should be careful,   kind of like in self-driving.
In self-driving, if things go wrong,   you might get injured. There are worse 
outcomes. But in software, it's almost   unbounded how terrible something could be.
I do think that they share that property.  What takes the long amount of time and the way 
to think about it is that it's a march of nines.  Every single nine is a constant amount of work.
Every single nine is the same amount of work.  When you get a demo and something works 90% 
of the time, that's just the first nine.  Then you need the second nine, a third 
nine, a fourth nine, a fifth nine.  While I was at Tesla for five years or so, we 
went through maybe three nines or two nines.  I don't know what it is, but 
multiple nines of iteration.  There are still more nines to go.
That's why these things take so long.  It's definitely formative for me, seeing 
something that was a demo. I'm very   unimpressed by demos. Whenever I see demos of 
anything, I'm extremely unimpressed by that.  If it's a demo that someone cooked 
up as a showing, it's worse.  If you can interact with it, it's a bit better.  But even then, you're not done. You need the 
actual product. It's going to face all these   challenges when it comes in contact 
with reality and all these different   pockets of behavior that need patching.
We're going to see all this stuff play   out. It's a march of nines. Each nine is 
constant. Demos are encouraging. It’s still   a huge amount of work to do.
It is a critical safety domain,   unless you're doing vibe coding, 
which is all nice and fun and so on.  That's why this also enforced my 
timelines from that perspective.  It's very interesting to hear you say that, that 
the safety guarantees you need from software   are not dissimilar to self-driving.
What people will often say is that   self-driving took so long because 
the cost of failure is so high.  A human makes a mistake on average every 
400,000 miles or every seven years.  If you had to release a coding agent that 
couldn't make a mistake for at least seven years,   it would be much harder to deploy.
But your point is that if you made a   catastrophic coding mistake, like breaking 
some important system every seven years...  Very easy to do.
In fact, in terms of wall clock time,   it would be much less than seven years because 
you're constantly outputting code like that.  In terms of tokens, it would be seven years.
But in terms of wall clock time...  In some ways, it's a much harder problem.
Self-driving is just one of   thousands of things that people do.
It's almost like a single vertical, I suppose.  Whereas when we're talking about 
general software engineering,   it's even more... There's more surface area.
There's another objection people make to that   analogy, which is that with self-driving, what 
took a big fraction of that time was solving   the problem of having basic perception 
that's robust, building representations,   and having a model that has some common 
sense so it can generalize to when it sees   something that's slightly out of distribution.
If somebody's waving down the road this way,   you don't need to train for it.
The thing will have some understanding   of how to respond to something like that.
These are things we're getting for free   with LLMs or VLMs today, so we don't have to 
solve these very basic representation problems.  So now deploying AIs across different domains 
will sort of be like deploying a self-driving   car with current models to a different city, 
which is hard but not like a 10-year-long task.  I'm not 100% sure if I fully agree with that.
I don't know how much we're getting for free.  There's still a lot of gaps in 
understanding what we are getting.  We're definitely getting more 
generalizable intelligence in a   single entity, whereas self-driving is a 
very special-purpose task that requires.  In some sense building a special-purpose task 
is maybe even harder in a certain sense because   it doesn't fall out from a more general thing 
that you're doing at scale, if that makes sense.  But the analogy still doesn't fully 
resonate because the LLMs are still   pretty fallible and they have a lot of 
gaps that still need to be filled in.  I don't think that we're 
getting magical generalization   completely out of the box, in a certain sense.
The other aspect that I wanted to return to is   that self-driving cars are nowhere near done 
still. The deployments are pretty minimal.   Even Waymo and so on has very few cars.
They're doing that roughly speaking   because they're not economical.
They've built something that lives in the future.  They've had to pull back the future, 
but they had to make it uneconomical.  There are all these costs, not just 
marginal costs for those cars and   their operation and maintenance, but 
also the capex of the entire thing.  Making it economical is still 
going to be a slog for them.  Also, when you look at these cars and 
there's no one driving, I actually think   it's a little bit deceiving because there 
are very elaborate teleoperation centers   of people kind of in a loop with these cars.
I don't have the full extent of it, but there's   more human-in-the-loop than you might expect.
There are people somewhere out there   beaming in from the sky.
I don't know if they're   fully in the loop with the driving.
Some of the time they are, but they're   certainly involved and there are people.
In some sense, we haven't actually removed   the person, we've moved them to 
somewhere where you can't see them.  I still think there will be some work, as you 
mentioned, going from environment to environment.  There are still challenges 
to make self-driving real.  But I do agree that it's definitely crossed 
a threshold where it kind of feels real,   unless it's really teleoperated.
For example, Waymo can't go to   all the different parts of the city.
My suspicion is that it's parts of the city   where you don't get good signal.
Anyway, I don't know anything   about the stack. I'm just making stuff up.
You led self-driving for five years at Tesla.  Sorry, I don't know anything 
about the specifics of Waymo.  By the way, I love Waymo 
and I take it all the time.  I just think that people are sometimes a 
little bit too naive about some of the progress   and there's still a huge amount of work.
Tesla took in my mind a much more scalable   approach and the team is doing extremely well.
I'm kind of on the record for predicting   how this thing will go.
Waymo had an early start   because you can package up so many sensors.
But I do think Tesla is taking the more   scalable strategy and it's going 
to look a lot more like that.  So this will still have to play out and hasn't.
But I don't want to talk about self-driving as   something that took a decade because it 
didn't take it yet, if that makes sense.  Because one, the start is at 1980 and not 10 
years ago, and then two, the end is not here yet.  The end is not near yet because when 
we're talking about self-driving,   usually in my mind it's self-driving at scale.
People don't have to get a driver's license, etc.  I'm curious to bounce two other ways in 
which the analogy might be different.  The reason I'm especially curious about this is 
because the question of how fast AI is deployed,   how valuable it is when it's early 
on is potentially the most important   question in the world right now.
If you're trying to model what the   year 2030 looks like, this is the question 
you ought to have some understanding of.  Another thing you might think is one, you have 
this latency requirement with self-driving.  I have no idea what the actual models are, but I 
assume it’s like tens of millions of parameters   or something, which is not the necessary 
constraint for knowledge work with LLMs.  Maybe it might be with computer use and stuff.
But the other big one is, maybe more   importantly, on this capex question.
Yes, there is additional cost to serving   up an additional copy of a model, but the opex 
of a session is quite low and you can amortize   the cost of AI into the training run itself, 
depending on how inference scaling goes and stuff.  But it's certainly not as much as building a whole 
new car to serve another instance of a model.  So the economics of deploying more 
widely are much more favorable.  I think that's right. If you're 
sticking to the realm of bits,   bits are a million times easier than anything 
that touches the physical world. I definitely   grant that. Bits are completely changeable, 
arbitrarily reshuffleable at a very rapid speed.  You would expect a much faster adaptation also in 
the industry and so on. What was the first one?  The latency requirements and 
its implications for model size?  I think that's roughly right. I also 
think that if we are talking about   knowledge work at scale, there will be some 
latency requirements, practically speaking,   because we're going to have to create a 
huge amount of compute and serve that.  The last aspect that I very briefly want 
to also talk about is all the rest of it.  What does society think about it? What are 
the legal ramifications? How is it working   legally? How is it working insurance-wise? 
What are those layers of it and aspects of it?  What is the equivalent of people 
putting a cone on a Waymo?  There are going to be equivalents of all that.
So I feel like self-driving is a very nice   analogy that you can borrow things from.
What is the equivalent of a cone in the car?  What is the equivalent of a teleoperating worker 
who's hidden away and all the aspects of it.  Do you have any opinions on what this 
implies about the current AI buildout,   which would 10x the amount of available compute 
in the world in a year or two and maybe more   than 100x it by the end of the decade.
If the use of AI will be lower than   some people naively predict, does 
that mean that we're overbuilding   compute or is that a separate question?
Kind of like what happened with railroads.  With what, sorry?
Was it railroads or?  Yeah, it was.
Yeah. There's historical precedent.   Or was it with the telecommunication industry?
Pre-paving the internet that only came a decade   later and creating a whole bubble in the 
telecommunications industry in the late '90s.  I understand I'm sounding very pessimistic 
here. I'm actually optimistic. I think this   will work. I think it's tractable. I'm 
only sounding pessimistic because when   I go on my Twitter timeline, I see all 
this stuff that makes no sense to me.  There's a lot of reasons for why that exists.
A lot of it is honestly just fundraising.   It's just incentive structures. 
A lot of it may be fundraising.  A lot of it is just attention, converting 
attention to money on the internet,   stuff like that.
There's a lot of   that going on, and I'm only reacting to that.
But I'm still overall very bullish on technology.  We're going to work through all this stuff.
There's been a rapid amount of progress.  I don't know that there's overbuilding.
I think we're going to be able to gobble up what,   in my understanding, is being built.
For example, Claude Code or OpenAI Codex   and stuff like that didn't even 
exist a year ago. Is that right?   This is a miraculous technology that didn't exist.
There's going to be a huge amount of demand,   as we see the demand in ChatGPT already and so on.
So I don't know that there's overbuilding.  I'm just reacting to some of the very fast 
timelines that people continue to say incorrectly.  I've heard many, many times over the course 
of my 15 years in AI where very reputable   people keep getting this wrong all the time.
I want this to be properly calibrated, and some   of this also has geopolitical ramifications and 
things like that with some of these questions.  I don't want people to make 
mistakes in that sphere of things.  I do want us to be grounded in the 
reality of what technology is and isn't.  Let's talk about education and Eureka.
One thing you could do is start another AI   lab and then try to solve those problems.
I’m curious what you're up to now,   and why not AI research itself?
I guess the way I would put it   is I feel some amount of determinism 
around the things that AI labs are doing.  I feel like I could help out there, but I 
don't know that I would uniquely improve it.  My personal big fear is that a lot of this 
stuff happens on the side of humanity,   and that humanity gets disempowered by it.
I care not just about all the Dyson spheres   that we're going to build and that AI is 
going to build in a fully autonomous way,   I care about what happens to humans.
I want humans to be well off in the future.  I feel like that's where I can a 
lot more uniquely add value than   an incremental improvement in the frontier lab.
I'm most afraid of something depicted in movies   like WALL-E or Idiocracy or something like that, 
where humanity is on the side of this stuff.  I want humans to be much, 
much better in this future.  To me, this is through education 
that you can achieve this.  So what are you working on there?
The easiest way I can describe it is   we're trying to build the Starfleet Academy.
I don’t know if you’ve watched Star Trek.  I haven’t.
Starfleet Academy is   this elite institution for frontier technology, 
building spaceships, and graduating cadets to be   the pilots of these spaceships and whatnot.
So I just imagine an elite institution for   technical knowledge and a kind of school that's 
very up-to-date and a premier institution.  A category of questions I have for you is 
explaining how one teaches technical or   scientific content well, because you 
are one of the world masters at it.  I'm curious both about how you think about 
it for content you've already put out there   on YouTube, but also, to the extent it's any 
different, how you think about it for Eureka.  With respect to Eureka, one thing that 
is very fascinating to me about education   is that I do think education will pretty 
fundamentally change with AIs on the side.  It has to be rewired and changed to some extent.
I still think that we're pretty early.  There's going to be a lot of people who 
are going to try to do the obvious things.  Have an LLM and ask it questions.
Do all the basic things that you would   do via prompting right now.
It's helpful,   but it still feels to me a bit like slop.
I'd like to do it properly, and I think the   capability is not there for what I would want.
What I'd want is an actual tutor experience.  A prominent example in my mind is I was 
recently learning Korean, so language learning.  I went through a phase where I was 
learning Korean by myself on the internet.  I went through a phase where I was part of a small 
class in Korea taking Korean with a bunch of other   people, which was really funny.
We had a teacher and 10   people or so taking Korean.
Then I switched to a one-on-one tutor.  I guess what was fascinating to me was, I think 
I had a really good tutor, but just thinking   through what this tutor was doing for me and how 
incredible that experience was and how high the   bar is for what I want to build eventually.
Instantly from a very short   conversation, she understood where I am 
as a student, what I know and don't know.  She was able to probe exactly the kinds of 
questions or things to understand my world model.  No LLM will do that for you 
100% right now, not even close.  But a tutor will do that if they're good.
Once she understands, she really served   me all the things that I needed at 
my current sliver of capability.  I need to be always appropriately challenged.
I can't be faced with something too hard or   too trivial, and a tutor is really good 
at serving you just the right stuff.  I felt like I was the only constraint to learning.
I was always given the perfect information. I'm   the only constraint. I felt good because 
I'm the only impediment that exists.  It's not that I can't find knowledge or 
that it's not properly explained or etc.  It's just my ability to memorize and so on.
This is what I want for people.  How do you automate that?
Very good question. At   the current capability, you don't.
That's why I think it's not actually the   right time to build this kind of an AI tutor.
I still think it's a useful product,   and lots of people will build it, but the bar 
is so high and the capability is not there.  Even today, I would say ChatGPT is an 
extremely valuable educational product.  But for me, it was so fascinating 
to see how high the bar is.  When I was with her, I almost felt 
like there's no way I can build this.  But you are building it, right?
Anyone who's had a really good   tutor is like, "How are you going to build 
this?" I'm waiting for that capability. I   did some AI consulting for computer vision.
A lot of times, the value that I brought to   the company was telling them not to use AI.
I was the AI expert, and they described the   problem, and I said, "Don't use AI." 
This is my value add. I feel like it's   the same in education right now, where 
I feel like for what I have in mind,   it's not yet the time, but the time will come.
For now, I'm building something that looks   maybe a bit more conventional that has a 
physical and digital component and so on.  But it's obvious how this 
should look in the future.  To the extent you're willing to 
say, what is the thing you hope   will be released this year or next year?
I'm building the first course. I want to   have a really, really good course, the 
obvious state-of-the-art destination   you go to to learn, AI in this case.
That's just what I'm familiar with, so it's   a really good first product to get to be really 
good at it. So that's what I'm building. Nanochat,   which you briefly mentioned, is a capstone project 
of LLM101N, which is a class that I'm building.  That's a really big piece of it.
But now I have to build out a lot of   the intermediates, and then I have to hire a small 
team of TAs and so on and build the entire course.  One more thing that I would say is that many 
times, when people think about education,   they think more about what I would say is 
a softer component of diffusing knowledge.  I have something very hard and technical in mind.
In my mind, education is the very difficult   technical process of building ramps to knowledge.
In my mind, nanochat is a ramp to   knowledge because it's very simple.
It's the super simplified full-stack thing.  If you give this artifact to someone and they 
look through it, they're learning a ton of stuff.  It's giving you a lot of what I call eurekas 
per second, which is understanding per second.  That's what I want, lots of eurekas per second.
So to me, this is a technical problem of   how do we build these ramps to knowledge.
So I almost think of Eureka as maybe not that   different from some of the frontier labs 
or some of the work that's going on there.  I want to figure out how to build these 
ramps very efficiently so that people are   never stuck and everything is always 
not too hard or not too trivial, and   you have just the right material to progress.
You're imagining in the short term that instead   of a tutor being able to probe your understanding, 
if you have enough self-awareness to be able to   probe yourself, you're never going to be stuck.
You can find the right answer between talking   to the TA or talking to an LLM and 
looking at the reference implementation.  It sounds like automation or 
AI is not a significant part.  So far, the big alpha here is your 
ability to explain AI codified   in the source material of the class.
That's fundamentally what the course is.  You always have to be calibrated to 
what capability exists in the industry.  A lot of people are going to 
pursue just asking ChatGPT, etc.  But I think right now, for example, if you go to 
ChatGPT and you say, teach me AI, there's no way.  It's going to give you some slop.
AI is never going to write nanochat right now.  But nanochat is a really 
useful intermediate point.  I'm collaborating with AI 
to create all this material,   so AI is still fundamentally very helpful.
Earlier on, I built CS231n at Stanford,   which I think was the first deep learning 
class at Stanford, which became very popular.  The difference in building out 231n 
then and LLM101N now is quite stark.  I feel really empowered by the LLMs as they 
exist right now, but I'm very much in the loop.  They're helping me build the 
materials, I go much faster.  They're doing a lot of the boring stuff, etc.
I feel like I'm developing the course much faster,   and it's LLM-infused, but it's not yet at a 
place where it can creatively create the content.  I'm still there to do that.
The trickiness is always   calibrating yourself to what exists.
When you imagine what is available   through Eureka in a couple of years, it 
seems like the big bottleneck is going to be   finding Karpathys in field after field who can 
convert their understanding into these ramps.  It would change over time. Right now, 
it would be hiring faculty to help work   hand-in-hand with AI and a team of people 
probably to build state-of-the-art courses.  Over time maybe some of the TAs can become AIs.
You just take all the course materials and then   I think you could serve a very good automated 
TA for the student when they have more basic   questions or something like that.
But I think you'll need faculty   for the overall architecture of a 
course and making sure that it fits.  So I see a progression of how this will evolve.
Maybe at some future point I'm not even that   useful and AI is doing most of the 
design much better than I could.  But I still think that's going 
to take some time to play out.  Are you imagining that people who have expertise 
in other fields are then contributing courses,   or do you feel like it's quite 
essential to the vision that you,   given your understanding of how you want to 
teach, are the one designing the content?  Sal Khan is narrating all 
the videos on Khan Academy.  Are you imagining something like that?
No, I will hire faculty because there   are domains in which I'm not an expert.
That's the only way to offer the state-of-the-art   experience for the student ultimately.
I do expect that I would hire faculty, but   I will probably stick around in AI for some time.
I do have something more conventional in mind for   the current capability than what 
people would probably anticipate.  When I'm building Starfleet Academy, I do probably 
imagine a physical institution, and maybe a tier   below that a digital offering that is not the 
state-of-the-art experience you would get when   someone comes in physically full-time and we 
work through material from start to end and   make sure you understand it. That's the physical 
offering. The digital offering is a bunch of stuff   on the internet and maybe some LLM assistant.
It's a bit more gimmicky in a tier below, but   at least it's accessible to 8 billion people.
I think you're basically inventing college   from first principles for the tools that 
are available today and just selecting   for people who have the motivation and the 
interest of really engaging with material.  There's going to have to be a lot of not 
just education but also re-education.  I would love to help out there because 
the jobs will probably change quite a bit.  For example, today a lot of people are 
trying to upskill in AI specifically.  I think it's a really good 
course to teach in this respect.  Motivation-wise, before AGI motivation is very 
simple to solve because people want to make money.  This is how you make money in the industry today.
Post-AGI is a lot more interesting possibly   because if everything is automated 
and there's nothing to do for anyone,   why would anyone go to a school?
I often say that pre-AGI education   is useful. Post-AGI education is fun. In 
a similar way, people go to the gym today.  We don't need their physical strength 
to manipulate heavy objects because we   have machines that do that.
They still go to the gym.  Why do they go to the gym?
Because it's fun, it's healthy,   and you look hot when you have a six-pack.
It's attractive for people to do that   in a very deep, psychological, 
evolutionary sense for humanity.  Education will play out in the same way.
You'll go to school like you go to the gym.  Right now, not that many people learn 
because learning is hard. You bounce   from material. Some people overcome that 
barrier, but for most people, it's hard.  It's a technical problem to solve.
It's a technical problem to do what my tutor   did for me when I was learning Korean.
It's tractable and buildable,   and someone should build it.
It's going to make learning   anything trivial and desirable, and people 
will do it for fun because it's trivial.  If I had a tutor like that for any arbitrary piece 
of knowledge, it's going to be so much easier to   learn anything, and people will do it.
They'll do it for the same   reasons they go to the gym.
That sounds different from using…   So post-AGI, you're using this as 
entertainment or as self-betterment.  But it sounded like you had a vision 
also that this education is relevant to   keeping humanity in control of AI. That sounds 
different. Is it entertaining for some people,   but then empowerment for some others?
How do you think about that?  I do think eventually it's a bit of 
a losing game, if that makes sense.  It is in the long term.
In the long term, which   is longer than maybe most people in the 
industry think about, it's a losing game.  I do think people can go so far and we've barely 
scratched the surface of how much a person can go.  That's just because people are bouncing off 
of material that's too easy or too hard.  People will be able to go much further.
Anyone will speak five languages because   why not? Because it's so trivial. Anyone will know 
all the basic curriculum of undergrad, et cetera.  Now that I'm understanding the 
vision, that's very interesting.  It has a perfect analog in gym culture.
I don't think 100 years   ago anybody would be ripped.
Nobody would have been able to just spontaneously   bench two plates or three plates or something.
It's very common now because of this idea of   systematically training and lifting weights in 
the gym, or systematically training to be able   to run a marathon, which is a capability 
most humans would not spontaneously have.  You're imagining similar things for 
learning across many different domains,   much more intensely, deeply, faster.
Exactly. I am betting a bit implicitly   on some of the timelessness of human nature.
It will be desirable to do all these things,   and I think people will look up 
to it as they have for millennia.  This will continue to be true.
There's some evidence of that historically.  If you look at, for example, aristocrats, or you 
look at ancient Greece or something like that,   whenever you had little pocket environments 
that were post-AGI in a certain sense, people   have spent a lot of their time flourishing in a 
certain way, either physically or cognitively.  I feel okay about the prospects of that.
If this is false and I'm wrong and we end up in a   WALL-E or Idiocracy future, then I don't even care 
if there are Dyson spheres. This is a terrible   outcome. I really do care about humanity.
Everyone has to just be   superhuman in a certain sense.
It's still a world in which that is not enabling   us to… It's like the culture world, right?
You're not fundamentally going to be able   to transform the trajectory 
of technology or influence   decisions by your own labor or cognition alone.
Maybe you can influence decisions because the AI   is asking for your approval, but it's not because 
I've invented something or I've come up with a new   design that I'm really influencing the future.
Maybe. I think there will be a transitional   period where we are going to be 
able to be in the loop and advance   things if we understand a lot of stuff.
In the long-term, that probably goes away.  It might even become a sport.
Right now you have powerlifters   who go extreme in this direction.
What is powerlifting in a cognitive era?  Maybe it's people who are really trying 
to make Olympics out of knowing stuff.  If you have a perfect AI tutor, 
maybe you can get extremely far.  I feel that the geniuses of 
today are barely scratching the   surface of what a human mind can do, I think.
I love this vision. I also feel like the person   you have the most product-market fit with is me 
because my job involves having to learn different   subjects every week, and I am very excited.
I'm similar, for that matter. A lot of people,   for example, hate school and want to get 
out of it. I really liked school. I loved   learning things, et cetera.
I wanted to stay in school.  I stayed all the way until Ph.D. and 
then they wouldn't let me stay longer,   so I went to the industry.
Roughly speaking, I love learning,   even for the sake of learning, but I also love 
learning because it's a form of empowerment and   being useful and productive.
You also made a point that   was subtle and I want to spell it out.
With what’s happened so far with online   courses, why haven't they already enabled us to 
enable every single human to know everything?  They're just so motivation-laden because there are 
no obvious on-ramps and it's so easy to get stuck.  If you had this thing instead—like a really 
good human tutor—it would just be such an   unlock from a motivation perspective.
I think so. It feels bad to bounce from   material. It feels bad. You get negative reward 
from sinking an amount of time in something and it   doesn't pan out, or being completely bored because 
what you're getting is too easy or too hard.  When you do it properly, learning feels good.
It's a technical problem to get there.  For a while, it's going to be AI plus human 
collab, and at some point, maybe it's just AI.  Can I ask some questions about teaching well?
If you had to give advice to another educator   in another field that you're curious about to 
make the kinds of YouTube tutorials you've made.  Maybe it might be especially interesting 
to talk about domains where you can't   test someone's technical understanding by 
having them code something up or something.  What advice would you give them?
That's a pretty broad topic. There are 10–20 tips   and tricks that I semi-consciously do probably.
But a lot of this comes   from my physics background.
I really, really did enjoy my physics background.  I have a whole rant on how everyone 
should learn physics in early school   education because early school education is 
not about accumulating knowledge or memory   for tasks later in the industry.
It's about booting up a brain.  Physics uniquely boots up the brain the 
best because some of the things that they   get you to do in your brain during 
physics is extremely valuable later.  The idea of building models and abstractions 
and understanding that there's a first-order   approximation that describes most of the system, 
but then there're second-order, third-order,   fourth-order terms that may or may not be present.
The idea that you're observing a very noisy   system, but there are these fundamental 
frequencies that you can abstract away.  When a physicist walks into the class and 
they say, "Assume there's a spherical cow,"   everyone laughs at that, but this is brilliant.
It's brilliant thinking that's very generalizable   across the industry because a cow can be 
approximated as a sphere in a bunch of ways.  There's a really good book, for example, Scale.
It's from a physicist talking about biology.  Maybe this is also a book 
I would recommend reading.  You can get a lot of really interesting 
approximations and chart scaling laws of animals.  You can look at their heartbeats and 
things like that, and they line up with   the size of the animal and things like that.
You can talk about an animal as a volume.  You can talk about the heat dissipation of that, 
because your heat dissipation grows as the surface   area, which is growing as a square.
But your heat creation or generation   is growing as a cube.
So I just feel like physicists   have all the right cognitive tools to 
approach problem solving in the world.  So because of that training, I 
always try to find the first-order   terms or the second-order terms of everything.
When I'm observing a system or a thing, I have a   tangle of a web of ideas or knowledge in my mind.
I'm trying to find, what is the thing that   matters? What is the first-order component? 
How can I simplify it? How can I have a   simplest thing that shows that thing, shows it in 
action, and then I can tack on the other terms?  Maybe an example from one of my repos that I 
think illustrates it well is called micrograd.  I don't know if you're familiar with this.
So micrograd is 100 lines of code   that shows backpropagation.
You can create neural networks   out of simple operations like plus and times, et 
cetera. Lego blocks of neural networks. You build   up a computational graph and you do a forward 
pass and a backward pass to get the gradients.  Now, this is at the heart of 
all neural network learning.  So micrograd is a 100 lines of 
pretty interpretable Python code,   and it can do forward and backward arbitrary 
neural networks, but not efficiently.  So micrograd, these 100 lines of Python, 
are everything you need to understand how   neural networks train. Everything else is just 
efficiency. Everything else is efficiency. There's   a huge amount of work to get efficiency.
You need your tensors, you lay them out,   you stride them, you make sure 
your kernels, orchestrating   memory movement correctly, et cetera.
It's all just efficiency, roughly speaking.  But the core intellectual piece of neural 
network training is micrograd. It's 100 lines.   You can easily understand it. It's a recursive 
application of chain rule to derive the gradient,   which allows you to optimize any 
arbitrary differentiable function.  So I love finding these small-order terms and 
serving them on a platter and discovering them.  I feel like education is the most intellectually 
interesting thing because you have a tangle   of understanding and you're trying to lay 
it out in a way that creates a ramp where   everything only depends on the thing before it.
I find that this untangling of knowledge is just   so intellectually interesting as a cognitive task.
I love doing it personally, but I just   have a fascination with trying to lay things 
out in a certain way. Maybe that helps me.  It also makes the learning 
experience so much more motivated.  Your tutorial on the transformer begins 
with bigrams, literally a lookup table from,   "Here's the word right now, or here's 
the previous word, here's the next word."  It's literally just a lookup table.
That’s the essence of it, yeah.  It’s such a brilliant way, starting with a 
lookup table and then going to a transformer.   Each piece is motivated. Why would you add 
that? Why would you add the next thing?  You could memorize the attention formula, 
but having an understanding of why every   single piece is relevant, what problem it solves.
You're presenting the pain before you present a   solution, and how clever is that?
You want to take the student   through that progression.
There are a lot of other small   things that make it nice and engaging and 
interesting. Always prompting the student.   There's a lot of small things like that are 
important and a lot of good educators will do   this. How would you solve this? I'm not going to 
present the solution before you guess. That would   be wasteful. That's a little bit of a…I don’t 
want to swear but it’s a dick move towards you   to present you with the solution before I give 
you a shot to try to come up with it yourself.  Because if you try to come up with it yourself, 
you get a better understanding of what the action   space is, what the objective is, and then 
why only this action fulfills that objective.  You have a chance to try it yourself, and you 
have an appreciation when I give you the solution.  It maximizes the amount of 
knowledge per new fact added.  Why do you think, by default, people who are 
genuine experts in their field are often bad   at explaining it to somebody ramping up?
It's the curse of knowledge and expertise.  This is a real phenomenon, and I suffered 
from it myself as much as I try not to.  But you take certain things for granted, 
and you can't put yourself in the shoes   of new people who are just starting out.
This is pervasive and happens to me as   well. One thing that's extremely helpful. 
As an example, someone was trying to show   me a paper in biology recently, and I just 
instantly had so many terrible questions.  What I did was I used ChatGPT to ask the 
questions with the paper in the context window.  It worked through some of the simple things.
Then I shared the thread to the person who   wrote that paper or worked on that work.
I felt like if they could see the dumb   questions I had, it might help 
them explain better in the future.  For my material, I would love it if people 
shared their dumb conversations with ChatGPT   about the stuff that I've created 
because it really helps me put myself   again in the shoes of someone who's starting out.
Another trick that just works astoundingly well.  If somebody writes a paper or a blog post or an 
announcement, it is in 100% of cases that just   the narration or the transcription of how they 
would explain it to you over lunch is way more,   not only understandable, but actually 
also more accurate and scientific,   in the sense that people have a bias 
to explain things in the most abstract,   jargon-filled way possible and to clear 
their throat for four paragraphs before   they explain the central idea.
But there's something about   communicating one-on-one with a person 
which compels you to just say the thing.  Just say the thing. I saw that 
tweet, I thought it was really good.  I shared it with a bunch of people.
I noticed this many, many times.  The most prominent example is that I 
remember back in my PhD days doing research.  You read someone's paper, and you 
work to understand what it's doing.  Then you catch them, you're having beers 
at the conference later, and you ask them,   "So this paper, what were you doing? What is the 
paper about?" They will just tell you these three   sentences that perfectly captured the essence 
of that paper and totally give you the idea.  And you didn't have to read the paper.
It's only when you're sitting at the table   with a beer or something, and they're 
like, "Oh yeah, the paper is just,   you take this idea, you take that idea and try 
this experiment and you try out this thing."  They have a way of just putting it 
conversationally just perfectly.   Why isn't that the abstract?
Exactly. This is coming from the   perspective of how somebody who's trying to 
explain an idea should formulate it better.  What is your advice as a student to other 
students, if you don't have a Karpathy   who is doing the exposition of an idea?
If you're reading a paper from somebody   or reading a book, what strategies do 
you employ to learn material you're   interested in in fields you're not an expert at?
I don't know that I have unique tips and tricks,   to be honest. It's a painful process. One thing 
that has always helped me quite a bit is—I   had a small tweet about this—learning things 
on demand is pretty nice. Learning depth-wise.   I do feel you need a bit of alternation of 
learning depth-wise, on demand—you're trying   to achieve a certain project that you're going 
to get a reward from—and learning breadth-wise,   which is just, "Oh, let's do whatever 101, 
and here's all the things you might need."  Which is a lot of school—does breadth-wise 
learning, like, "Oh, trust me, you'll need   this later," that kind of stuff. Okay, I trust 
you. I'll learn it because I guess I need it.  But I love the kind of learning 
where you'll get a reward out of   doing something, and you're learning on demand.
The other thing that I've found extremely helpful.  This is an aspect where education is a bit more 
selfless, but explaining things to people is a   beautiful way to learn something more deeply.
This happens to me all the time.  It probably happens to other people too because 
I realize if I don't really understand something,   I can't explain it.
I'm trying and I'm like,   "Oh, I don't understand this."
It's so annoying to come to terms with that.  You can go back and make sure you understood it.
It fills these gaps of your understanding.  It forces you to come to terms 
with them and to reconcile them.  I love to re-explain things and people 
should be doing that more as well.  That forces you to manipulate the knowledge 
and make sure that you know what you're   talking about when you're explaining it.
That's an excellent note to close on. Andrej,   that was great.
Thank you.


## Andrej Karpathy: Software Is Changing (Again)

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LCEmiRjPEtQ

Please welcome former director of AI Tesla Andre Carpathy. [Music] Hello. [Music] Wow, a lot of people here. Hello. Um, okay. Yeah. So I'm excited to be here today to talk to you about software in the era of AI. And I'm told that many of you are students like bachelors, masters, PhD and so on. And you're about to enter the industry. And I think it's actually like an extremely unique and very interesting time to enter the industry right now. And I think fundamentally the reason for that is that um software is changing uh again. And I say again because I actually gave this talk already. Um but the problem is that software keeps changing. So I actually have a lot of material to create new talks and I think it's changing quite fundamentally. I think roughly speaking software has not changed much on such a fundamental level for 70 years. And then it's changed I think about twice quite rapidly in the last few years. And so there's just a huge amount of work to do a huge amount of software to write and rewrite. So let's take a look at maybe the realm of software. So if we kind of think of this as like the map of software this is a really cool tool called map of GitHub. Um this is kind of like all the software that's written. Uh these are instructions to the computer for carrying out tasks in the digital space. So if you zoom in here, these are all different kinds of repositories and this is all the code that has been written. And a few years ago I kind of observed that um software was kind of changing and there was kind of like a new type of software around and I called this software 2.0 at the time and the idea here was that software 1.0 is the code you write for the computer. Software 2.0 know are basically neural networks and in particular the weights of a neural network and you're not writing this code directly you are most you are more kind of like tuning the data sets and then you're running an optimizer to create to create the parameters of this neural net and I think like at the time neural nets were kind of seen as like just a different kind of classifier like a decision tree or something like that and so I think it was kind of like um I think this framing was a lot more appropriate and now actually what we have is kind of like an equivalent of GitHub in the realm of software 2.0 And I think the hugging face is basically equivalent of GitHub in software 2.0. And there's also model atlas and you can visualize all the code written there. In case you're curious, by the way, the giant circle, the point in the middle, uh these are the parameters of flux, the image generator. And so anytime someone tunes a on top of a flux model, you basically create a git commit uh in this space and uh you create a different kind of a image generator. So basically what we have is software 1.0 is the computer code that programs a computer. Software 2.0 are the weights which program neural networks. Uh and here's an example of Alexet image recognizer neural network. Now so far all of the neural networks that we've been familiar with until recently where kind of like fixed function computers image to categories or something like that. And I think what's changed and I think is a quite fundamental change is that neural networks became programmable with large language models. And so I I see this as quite new, unique. It's a new kind of a computer and uh so in my mind it's uh worth giving it a new designation of software 3.0. And basically your prompts are now programs that program the LLM. And uh remarkably uh these uh prompts are written in English. So it's kind of a very interesting programming language. Um so maybe uh to summarize the difference if you're doing sentiment classification for example you can imagine writing some uh amount of Python to to basically do sentiment classification or you can train a neural net or you can prompt a large language model. Uh so here this is a few short prompt and you can imagine changing it and programming the computer in a slightly different way. So basically we have software 1.0 software 2.0 and I think we're seeing maybe you've seen a lot of GitHub code is not just like code anymore. there's a bunch of like English interspersed with code and so I think kind of there's a growing category of new kind of code. So not only is it a new programming paradigm, it's also remarkable to me that it's in our native language of English. And so when this blew my mind a few uh I guess years ago now I tweeted this and um I think it captured the attention of a lot of people and this is my currently pinned tweet uh is that remarkably we're now programming computers in English. Now, when I was at uh Tesla, um we were working on the uh autopilot and uh we were trying to get the car to drive and I sort of showed this slide at the time where you can imagine that the inputs to the car are on the bottom and they're going through a software stack to produce the steering and acceleration and I made the observation at the time that there was a ton of C++ code around in the autopilot which was the software 1.0 code and then there was some neural nets in there doing image recognition and uh I kind of observed that over time as we made the autopilot better basically the neural network grew in capability and size and in addition to that all the C++ code was being deleted and kind of like was um and a lot of the kind of capabilities and functionality that was originally written in 1.0 was migrated to 2.0. So as an example, a lot of the stitching up of information across images from the different cameras and across time was done by a neural network and we were able to delete a lot of code and so the software 2.0 stack quite literally ate through the software stack of the autopilot. So I thought this was really remarkable at the time and I think we're seeing the same thing again where uh basically we have a new kind of software and it's eating through the stack. We have three completely different programming paradigms and I think if you're entering the industry it's a very good idea to be fluent in all of them because they all have slight pros and cons and you may want to program some functionality in 1.0 or 2.0 or 3.0. Are you going to train neurallet? Are you going to just prompt an LLM? Should this be a piece of code that's explicit etc. So we all have to make these decisions and actually potentially uh fluidly trans transition between these paradigms. So what I wanted to get into now is first I want to in the first part talk about LLMs and how to kind of like think of this new paradigm and the ecosystem and what that looks like. Uh like what are what is this new computer? What does it look like and what does the ecosystem look like? Um I was struck by this quote from Anduring actually uh many years ago now I think and I think Andrew is going to be speaking right after me. Uh but he said at the time AI is the new electricity and I do think that it um kind of captures something very interesting in that LLMs certainly feel like they have properties of utilities right now. So um LLM labs like OpenAI, Gemini, Enthropic etc. They spend capex to train the LLMs and this is kind of equivalent to building out a grid and then there's opex to serve that intelligence over APIs to all of us and this is done through metered access where we pay per million tokens or something like that and we have a lot of demands that are very utility- like demands out of this API we demand low latency high uptime consistent quality etc. In electricity, you would have a transfer switch. So you can transfer your electricity source from like grid and solar or battery or generator. In LLM, we have maybe open router and easily switch between the different types of LLMs that exist. Because the LLM are software, they don't compete for physical space. So it's okay to have basically like six electricity providers and you can switch between them, right? Because they don't compete in such a direct way. And I think what's also a little fascinating and we saw this in the last few days actually a lot of the LLMs went down and people were kind of like stuck and unable to work. And uh I think it's kind of fascinating to me that when the state-of-the-art LLMs go down, it's actually kind of like an intelligence brownout in the world. It's kind of like when the voltage is unreliable in the grid and uh the planet just gets dumber the more reliance we have on these models, which already is like really dramatic and I think will continue to grow. But LLM's don't only have properties of utilities. I think it's also fair to say that they have some properties of fabs. And the reason for this is that the capex required for building LLM is actually quite large. Uh it's not just like building some uh power station or something like that, right? You're investing a huge amount of money and I think the tech tree and uh for the technology is growing quite rapidly. So we're in a world where we have sort of deep tech trees, research and development secrets that are centralizing inside the LLM labs. Um and but I think the analogy muddies a little bit also because as I mentioned this is software and software is a bit less defensible because it is so malleable. And so um I think it's just an interesting kind of thing to think about potentially. There's many analogy analogies you can make like a 4 nanometer process node maybe is something like a cluster with certain max flops. You can think about when you're use when you're using Nvidia GPUs and you're only doing the software and you're not doing the hardware. That's kind of like the fabless model. But if you're actually also building your own hardware and you're training on TPUs if you're Google, that's kind of like the Intel model where you own your fab. So I think there's some analogies here that make sense. But actually I think the analogy that makes the most sense perhaps is that in my mind LLM have very strong kind of analogies to operating systems. Uh in that this is not just electricity or water. It's not something that comes out of the tap as a commodity. uh this is these are now increasingly complex software ecosystems right so uh they're not just like simple commodities like electricity and it's kind of interesting to me that the ecosystem is shaping in a very similar kind of way where you have a few closed source providers like Windows or Mac OS and then you have an open source alternative like Linux and I think for u neural for LLMs as well we have a kind of a few competing closed source providers and then maybe the llama ecosystem is currently like maybe a close approximation to something that may grow into something like Linux. Again, I think it's still very early because these are just simple LLMs, but we're starting to see that these are going to get a lot more complicated. It's not just about the LLM itself. It's about all the tool use and the multiodalities and how all of that works. And so when I sort of had this realization a while back, I tried to sketch it out and it kind of seemed to me like LLMs are kind of like a new operating system, right? So the LLM is a new kind of a computer. It's sitting it's kind of like the CPU equivalent. uh the context windows are kind of like the memory and then the LLM is orchestrating memory and compute uh for problem solving um using all of these uh capabilities here and so definitely if you look at it looks very much like operating system from that perspective. Um, a few more analogies. For example, if you want to download an app, say I go to VS Code and I go to download, you can download VS Code and you can run it on Windows, Linux or or Mac in the same way as you can take an LLM app like cursor and you can run it on GPT or cloud or Gemini series, right? It's just a drop down. So, it's kind of like similar in that way as well. uh more analogies that I think strike me is that we're kind of like in this 1960sish era where LLM compute is still very expensive for this new kind of a computer and that forces the LLMs to be centralized in the cloud and we're all just uh sort of thing clients that interact with it over the network and none of us have full utilization of these computers and therefore it makes sense to use time sharing where we're all just you know a dimension of the batch when they're running the computer in the cloud. And this is very much what computers used to look like at during this time. The operating systems were in the cloud. Everything was streamed around and there was batching. And so the p the personal computing revolution hasn't happened yet because it's just not economical. It doesn't make sense. But I think some people are trying. And it turns out that Mac minis, for example, are a very good fit for some of the LLMs because it's all if you're doing batch one inference, this is all super memory bound. So this actually works. And uh I think these are some early indications maybe of personal computing. Uh but this hasn't really happened yet. It's not clear what this looks like. Maybe some of you get to invent what what this is or how it works or uh what this should what this should be. Maybe one more analogy that I'll mention is whenever I talk to Chach or some LLM directly in text, I feel like I'm talking to an operating system through the terminal. Like it's just it's it's text. It's direct access to the operating system. And I think a guey hasn't yet really been invented in like a general way like should chatt have a guey like different than just a tech bubbles. Uh certainly some of the apps that we're going to go into in a bit have guey but there's no like guey across all the tasks if that makes sense. Um there are some ways in which LLMs are different from kind of operating systems in some fairly unique way and from early computing. And I wrote about uh this one particular property that strikes me as very different uh this time around. It's that LLMs like flip they flip the direction of technology diffusion uh that is usually uh present in technology. So for example with electricity, cryptography, computing, flight, internet, GPS, lots of new transformative technologies that have not been around. Typically it is the government and corporations that are the first users because it's new and expensive etc. and it only later diffuses to consumer. Uh, but I feel like LLMs are kind of like flipped around. So maybe with early computers, it was all about ballistics and military use, but with LLMs, it's all about how do you boil an egg or something like that. This is certainly like a lot of my use. And so it's really fascinating to me that we have a new magical computer and it's like helping me boil an egg. It's not helping the government do something really crazy like some military ballistics or some special technology. Indeed, corporations are governments are lagging behind the adoption of all of us, of all of these technologies. So, it's just backwards and I think it informs maybe some of the uses of how we want to use this technology or like where are some of the first apps and so on. So, in summary so far, LLM labs LLMs. I think it's accurate language to use, but LLMs are complicated operating systems. They're circa 1960s in computing and we're redoing computing all over again. and they're currently available via time sharing and distributed like a utility. What is new and unprecedented is that they're not in the hands of a few governments and corporations. They're in the hands of all of us because we all have a computer and it's all just software and Chaship was beamed down to our computers like billions of people like instantly and overnight and this is insane. Uh and it's kind of insane to me that this is the case and now it is our time to enter the industry and program these computers. This is crazy. So I think this is quite remarkable. Before we program LLMs, we have to kind of like spend some time to think about what these things are. And I especially like to kind of talk about their psychology. So the way I like to think about LLMs is that they're kind of like people spirits. Um they are stoastic simulations of people. Um and the simulator in this case happens to be an auto reggressive transformer. So transformer is a neural net. Uh it's and it just kind of like is goes on the level of tokens. It goes chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk. And there's an almost equal amount of compute for every single chunk. Um and um this simulator of course is is just is basically there's some weights involved and we fit it to all of text that we have on the internet and so on. And you end up with this kind of a simulator and because it is trained on humans, it's got this emergent psychology that is humanlike. So the first thing you'll notice is of course uh LLM have encyclopedic knowledge and memory. uh and they can remember lots of things, a lot more than any single individual human can because they read so many things. It's it actually kind of reminds me of this movie Rainman, which I actually really recommend people watch. It's an amazing movie. I love this movie. Um and Dustin Hoffman here is an autistic savant who has almost perfect memory. So, he can read a he can read like a phone book and remember all of the names and phone numbers. And I kind of feel like LM are kind of like very similar. They can remember Shaw hashes and lots of different kinds of things very very easily. So they certainly have superpowers in some set in some respects. But they also have a bunch of I would say cognitive deficits. So they hallucinate quite a bit. Um and they kind of make up stuff and don't have a very good uh sort of internal model of self-nowledge, not sufficient at least. And this has gotten better but not perfect. They display jagged intelligence. So they're going to be superhuman in some problems solving domains. And then they're going to make mistakes that basically no human will make. like you know they will insist that 9.11 is greater than 9.9 or that there are two Rs in strawberry these are some famous examples but basically there are rough edges that you can trip on so that's kind of I think also kind of unique um they also kind of suffer from entrograde amnesia um so uh and I think I'm alluding to the fact that if you have a co-orker who joins your organization this co-orker will over time learn your organization and uh they will understand and gain like a huge amount of context on the organization and they go home and they sleep and they consolidate knowledge and they develop expertise over time. LLMs don't natively do this and this is not something that has really been solved in the R&D of LLM. I think um and so context windows are really kind of like working memory and you have to sort of program the working memory quite directly because they don't just kind of like get smarter by uh by default and I think a lot of people get tripped up by the analogies uh in this way. Uh in popular culture I recommend people watch these two movies uh Momento and 51st dates. In both of these movies, the protagonists, their weights are fixed and their context windows gets wiped every single morning and it's really problematic to go to work or have relationships when this happens and this happens to all the time. I guess one more thing I would point to is security kind of related limitations of the use of LLM. So for example, LLMs are quite gullible. Uh they are susceptible to prompt injection risks. They might leak your data etc. And so um and there's many other considerations uh security related. So, so basically long story short, you have to load your you have to load your you have to simultaneously think through this superhuman thing that has a bunch of cognitive deficits and issues. How do we and yet they are extremely like useful and so how do we program them and how do we work around their deficits and enjoy their superhuman powers. So what I want to switch to now is talk about the opportunities of how do we use these models and what are some of the biggest opportunities. This is not a comprehensive list just some of the things that I thought were interesting for this talk. The first thing I'm kind of excited about is what I would call partial autonomy apps. So for example, let's work with the example of coding. You can certainly go to chacht directly and you can start copy pasting code around and copyping bug reports and stuff around and getting code and copy pasting everything around. Why would you why would you do that? Why would you go directly to the operating system? It makes a lot more sense to have an app dedicated for this. And so I think many of you uh use uh cursor. I do as well. And uh cursor is kind of like the thing you want instead. You don't want to just directly go to the chash apt. And I think cursor is a very good example of an early LLM app that has a bunch of properties that I think are um useful across all the LLM apps. So in particular, you will notice that we have a traditional interface that allows a human to go in and do all the work manually just as before. But in addition to that, we now have this LLM integration that allows us to go in bigger chunks. And so some of the properties of LLM apps that I think are shared and useful to point out. Number one, the LLMs basically do a ton of the context management. Um, number two, they orchestrate multiple calls to LLMs, right? So in the case of cursor, there's under the hood embedding models for all your files, the actual chat models, models that apply diffs to the code, and this is all orchestrated for you. A really big one that uh I think also maybe not fully appreciated always is application specific uh GUI and the importance of it. Um because you don't just want to talk to the operating system directly in text. Text is very hard to read, interpret, understand and also like you don't want to take some of these actions natively in text. So it's much better to just see a diff as like red and green change and you can see what's being added is subtracted. It's much easier to just do command Y to accept or command N to reject. I shouldn't have to type it in text, right? So, a guey allows a human to audit the work of these fallible systems and to go faster. I'm going to come back to this point a little bit uh later as well. And the last kind of feature I want to point out is that there's what I call the autonomy slider. So, for example, in cursor, you can just do tap completion. You're mostly in charge. You can select a chunk of code and command K to change just that chunk of code. You can do command L to change the entire file. Or you can do command I which just you know let it rip do whatever you want in the entire repo and that's the sort of full autonomy agent agentic version and so you are in charge of the autonomy slider and depending on the complexity of the task at hand you can uh tune the amount of autonomy that you're willing to give up uh for that task maybe to show one more example of a fairly successful LLM app uh perplexity um it also has very similar features to what I've just pointed out to in cursor uh it packages up a lot of the information. It orchestrates multiple LLMs. It's got a GUI that allows you to audit some of its work. So, for example, it will site sources and you can imagine inspecting them. And it's got an autonomy slider. You can either just do a quick search or you can do research or you can do deep research and come back 10 minutes later. So, this is all just varying levels of autonomy that you give up to the tool. So, I guess my question is I feel like a lot of software will become partially autonomous. I'm trying to think through like what does that look like? And for many of you who maintain products and services, how are you going to make your products and services partially autonomous? Can an LLM see everything that a human can see? Can an LLM act in all the ways that a human could act? And can humans supervise and stay in the loop of this activity? Because again, these are fallible systems that aren't yet perfect. And what does a diff look like in Photoshop or something like that? You know, and also a lot of the traditional software right now, it has all these switches and all this kind of stuff that's all designed for human. All of this has to change and become accessible to LLMs. So, one thing I want to stress with a lot of these LLM apps that I'm not sure gets as much attention as it should is um we we're now kind of like cooperating with AIS and usually they are doing the generation and we as humans are doing the verification. It is in our interest to make this loop go as fast as possible. So, we're getting a lot of work done. There are two major ways that I think uh this can be done. Number one, you can speed up verification a lot. Um, and I think guies, for example, are extremely important to this because a guey utilizes your computer vision GPU in all of our head. Reading text is effortful and it's not fun, but looking at stuff is fun and it's it's just a kind of like a highway to your brain. So, I think guies are very useful for auditing systems and visual representations in general. And number two, I would say is we have to keep the AI on the leash. We I think a lot of people are getting way over excited with AI agents and uh it's not useful to me to get a diff of 10,000 lines of code to my repo. Like I have to I'm still the bottleneck, right? Even though that 10,00 lines come out instantly, I have to make sure that this thing is not introducing bugs. It's just like and that it's doing the correct thing, right? And that there's no security issues and so on. So um I think that um yeah basically you we have to sort of like it's in our interest to make the the flow of these two go very very fast and we have to somehow keep the AI on the leash because it gets way too overreactive. It's uh it's kind of like this. This is how I feel when I do AI assisted coding. If I'm just bite coding everything is nice and great but if I'm actually trying to get work done it's not so great to have an overreactive uh agent doing all this kind of stuff. So this slide is not very good. I'm sorry, but I guess I'm trying to develop like many of you some ways of utilizing these agents in my coding workflow and to do AI assisted coding. And in my own work, I'm always scared to get way too big diffs. I always go in small incremental chunks. I want to make sure that everything is good. I want to spin this loop very very fast and um I sort of work on small chunks of single concrete thing. Uh and so I think many of you probably are developing similar ways of working with the with LLMs. Um, I also saw a number of blog posts that try to develop these best practices for working with LLMs. And here's one that I read recently and I thought was quite good. And it kind of discussed some techniques and some of them have to do with how you keep the AI on the leash. And so, as an example, if you are prompting, if your prompt is vague, then uh the AI might not do exactly what you wanted and in that case, verification will fail. You're going to ask for something else. If a verification fails, then you're going to start spinning. So it makes a lot more sense to spend a bit more time to be more concrete in your prompts which increases the probability of successful verification and you can move forward. And so I think a lot of us are going to end up finding um kind of techniques like this. I think in my own work as well I'm currently interested in uh what education looks like in um together with kind of like now that we have AI uh and LLMs what does education look like? And I think a a large amount of thought for me goes into how we keep AI on the leash. I don't think it just works to go to chat and be like, "Hey, teach me physics." I don't think this works because the AI is like gets lost in the woods. And so for me, this is actually two separate apps. For example, there's an app for a teacher that creates courses and then there's an app that takes courses and serves them to students. And in both cases, we now have this intermediate artifact of a course that is auditable and we can make sure it's good. We can make sure it's consistent. and the AI is kept on the leash with respect to a certain syllabus, a certain like um progression of projects and so on. And so this is one way of keeping the AI on leash and I think has a much higher likelihood of working and the AI is not getting lost in the woods. One more kind of analogy I wanted to sort of allude to is I'm not I'm no stranger to partial autonomy and I kind of worked on this I think for five years at Tesla and this is also a partial autonomy product and shares a lot of the features like for example right there in the instrument panel is the GUI of the autopilot so it's showing me what the what the neural network sees and so on and we have the autonomy slider where over the course of my tenure there we did more and more autonomous tasks for the user and maybe the story that I wanted to tell very briefly is uh actually the first time I drove a self-driving vehicle was in 2013 and I had a friend who worked at Whimo and uh he offered to give me a drive around Palo Alto. I took this picture using Google Glass at the time and many of you are so young that you might not even know what that is. Uh but uh yeah, this was like all the rage at the time. And we got into this car and we went for about a 30-minute drive around Palo Alto highways uh streets and so on. And this drive was perfect. There was zero interventions and this was 2013 which is now 12 years ago. And it kind of struck me because at the time when I had this perfect drive, this perfect demo, I felt like, wow, self-driving is imminent because this just worked. This is incredible. Um, but here we are 12 years later and we are still working on autonomy. Um, we are still working on driving agents and even now we haven't actually like really solved the problem. like you may see Whimos going around and they look driverless but you know there's still a lot of teleoperation and a lot of human in the loop of a lot of this driving so we still haven't even like declared success but I think it's definitely like going to succeed at this point but it just took a long time and so I think like like this is software is really tricky I think in the same way that driving is tricky and so when I see things like oh 2025 is the year of agents I get very concerned and I kind of feel like you know this is the decade of agents and this is going to be quite some time. We need humans in the loop. We need to do this carefully. This is software. Let's be serious here. One more kind of analogy that I always think through is the Iron Man suit. Uh I think this is I always love Iron Man. I think it's like so um correct in a bunch of ways with respect to technology and how it will play out. And what I love about the Iron Man suit is that it's both an augmentation and Tony Stark can drive it and it's also an agent. And in some of the movies, the Iron Man suit is quite autonomous and can fly around and find Tony and all this kind of stuff. And so this is the autonomy slider is we can be we can build augmentations or we can build agents and we kind of want to do a bit of both. But at this stage I would say working with fallible LLMs and so on. I would say you know it's less Iron Man robots and more Iron Man suits that you want to build. It's less like building flashy demos of autonomous agents and more building partial autonomy products. And these products have custom gueies and UIUX. And we're trying to um and this is done so that the generation verification loop of the human is very very fast. But we are not losing the sight of the fact that it is in principle possible to automate this work. And there should be an autonomy slider in your product. And you should be thinking about how you can slide that autonomy slider and make your product uh sort of um more autonomous over time. But this is kind of how I think there's lots of opportunities in these kinds of products. I want to now switch gears a little bit and talk about one other dimension that I think is very unique. Not only is there a new type of programming language that allows for autonomy in software but also as I mentioned it's programmed in English which is this natural interface and suddenly everyone is a programmer because everyone speaks natural language like English. So this is extremely bullish and very interesting to me and also completely unprecedented. I would say it it used to be the case that you need to spend five to 10 years studying something to be able to do something in software. this is not the case anymore. So, I don't know if by any chance anyone has heard of vibe coding. Uh, this this is the tweet that kind of like introduced this, but I'm told that this is now like a major meme. Um, fun story about this is that I've been on Twitter for like 15 years or something like that at this point and I still have no clue which tweet will become viral and which tweet like fizzles and no one cares. And I thought that this tweet was going to be the latter. I don't know. It was just like a shower of thoughts. But this became like a total meme and I really just can't tell. But I guess like it struck a chord and it gave a name to something that everyone was feeling but couldn't quite say in words. So now there's a Wikipedia page and everything. This is like [Applause] yeah this is like a major contribution now or something like that. So, um, so Tom Wolf from HuggingFace shared this beautiful video that I really love. Um, these are kids vibe coding. And I find that this is such a wholesome video. Like, I love this video. Like, how can you look at this video and feel bad about the future? The future is great. I think this will end up being like a gateway drug to software development. Um, I'm not a doomer about the future of the generation and I think yeah, I love this video. So, I tried by coding a little bit uh as well because it's so fun. Uh, so bike coding is so great when you want to build something super duper custom that doesn't appear to exist and you just want to wing it because it's a Saturday or something like that. So, I built this uh iOS app and I don't I can't actually program in Swift, but I was really shocked that I was able to build like a super basic app and I'm not going to explain it. It's really uh dumb, but uh I kind of like this was just like a day of work and this was running on my phone like later that day and I was like, "Wow, this is amazing." I didn't have to like read through Swift for like five days or something like that to like get started. I also vipcoded this app called Menu Genen. And this is live. You can try it in menu.app. And I basically had this problem where I show up at a restaurant, I read through the menu, and I have no idea what any of the things are. And I need pictures. So this doesn't exist. So I was like, "Hey, I'm going to bite code it." So, um, this is what it looks like. You go to menu.app, um, and, uh, you take a picture of a of a menu and then menu generates the images and everyone gets $5 in credits for free when you sign up. And therefore, this is a major cost center in my life. So, this is a negative negative uh, revenue app for me right now. I've lost a huge amount of money on menu. Okay. But the fascinating thing about menu genen for me is that the code of the v the vite coding part the code was actually the easy part of v of v coding menu and most of it actually was when I tried to make it real so that you can actually have authentication and payments and the domain name and averal deployment. This was really hard and all of this was not code. All of this devops stuff was in me in the browser clicking stuff and this was extreme slo and took another week. So it was really fascinating that I had the menu genen um basically demo working on my laptop in a few hours and then it took me a week because I was trying to make it real and the reason for this is this was just really annoying. Um, so for example, if you try to add Google login to your web page, I know this is very small, but just a huge amount of instructions of this clerk library telling me how to integrate this. And this is crazy. Like it's telling me go to this URL, click on this dropdown, choose this, go to this, and click on that. And it's like telling me what to do. Like a computer is telling me the actions I should be taking. Like you do it. Why am I doing this? What the hell? I had to follow all these instructions. This was crazy. So I think the last part of my talk therefore focuses on can we just build for agents? I don't want to do this work. Can agents do this? Thank you. Okay. So roughly speaking, I think there's a new category of consumer and manipulator of digital information. It used to be just humans through GUIs or computers through APIs. And now we have a completely new thing and agents are they're computers but they are humanlike kind of right they're people spirits there's people spirits on the internet and they need to interact with our software infrastructure like can we build for them it's a new thing so as an example you can have robots.txt on your domain and you can instruct uh or like advise I suppose um uh web crawlers on how to behave on your website in the same way you can have maybe lm.txt txt file which is just a simple markdown that's telling LLMs what this domain is about and this is very readable to a to an LLM. If it had to instead get the HTML of your web page and try to parse it, this is very errorprone and difficult and will screw it up and it's not going to work. So we can just directly speak to the LLM. It's worth it. Um a huge amount of documentation is currently written for people. So you will see things like lists and bold and pictures and this is not directly accessible by an LLM. So I see some of the services now are transitioning a lot of the their docs to be specifically for LLMs. So Versell and Stripe as an example are early movers here but there are a few more that I've seen already and they offer their documentation in markdown. Markdown is super easy for LMS to understand. This is great. Um maybe one simple example from from uh my experience as well. Maybe some of you know three blue one brown. He makes beautiful animation videos on YouTube. [Applause] Yeah, I love this library. So that he wrote uh Manon and I wanted to make my own and uh there's extensive documentations on how to use manon and so I didn't want to actually read through it. So I copy pasted the whole thing to an LLM and I described what I wanted and it just worked out of the box like LLM just bcoded me an animation exactly what I wanted and I was like wow this is amazing. So if we can make docs legible to LLMs, it's going to unlock a huge amount of um kind of use and um I think this is wonderful and should should happen more. The other thing I wanted to point out is that you do unfortunately have to it's not just about taking your docs and making them appear in markdown. That's the easy part. We actually have to change the docs because anytime your docs say click this is bad. An LLM will not be able to natively take this action right now. So, Verscell, for example, is replacing every occurrence of click with an equivalent curl command that your LM agent could take on your behalf. Um, and so I think this is very interesting. And then, of course, there's a model context protocol from Enthropic. And this is also another way, it's a protocol of speaking directly to agents as this new consumer and manipulator of digital information. So, I'm very bullish on these ideas. The other thing I really like is a number of little tools here and there that are helping ingest data that in like very LLM friendly formats. So for example, when I go to a GitHub repo like my nanoGPT repo, I can't feed this to an LLM and ask questions about it uh because it's you know this is a human interface on GitHub. So when you just change the URL from GitHub to get ingest then uh this will actually concatenate all the files into a single giant text and it will create a directory structure etc. And this is ready to be copy pasted into your favorite LLM and you can do stuff. Maybe even more dramatic example of this is deep wiki where it's not just the raw content of these files. uh this is from Devon but also like they have Devon basically do analysis of the GitHub repo and Devon basically builds up a whole docs uh pages just for your repo and you can imagine that this is even more helpful to copy paste into your LLM. So I love all the little tools that basically where you just change the URL and it makes something accessible to an LLM. So this is all well and great and u I think there should be a lot more of it. One more note I wanted to make is that it is absolutely possible that in the future LLMs will be able to this is not even future this is today they'll be able to go around and they'll be able to click stuff and so on but I still think it's very worth u basically meeting LLM halfway LLM's halfway and making it easier for them to access all this information uh because this is still fairly expensive I would say to use and uh a lot more difficult and so I do think that lots of software there will be a long tail where it won't like adapt apps because these are not like live player sort of repositories or digital infrastructure and we will need these tools. Uh but I think for everyone else I think it's very worth kind of like meeting in some middle point. So I'm bullish on both if that makes sense. So in summary, what an amazing time to get into the industry. We need to rewrite a ton of code. A ton of code will be written by professionals and by coders. These LLMs are kind of like utilities, kind of like fabs, but they're kind of especially like operating systems. But it's so early. It's like 1960s of operating systems and uh and I think a lot of the analogies cross over. Um and these LMS are kind of like these fallible uh you know people spirits that we have to learn to work with. And in order to do that properly, we need to adjust our infrastructure towards it. So when you're building these LLM apps, I describe some of the ways of working effectively with these LLMs and some of the tools that make that uh kind of possible and how you can spin this loop very very quickly and basically create partial tunneling products and then um yeah, a lot of code has to also be written for the agents more directly. But in any case, going back to the Iron Man suit analogy, I think what we'll see over the next decade roughly is we're going to take the slider from left to right. And I'm very interesting. It's going to be very interesting to see what that looks like. And I can't wait to build it with all of you. Thank you.


## Skill Issue: Andrej Karpathy on Code Agents, AutoResearch, and the Loopy Era of AI

URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kwSVtQ7dziU

code's not even the right verb anymore, right? But I have to um express my will to my agents for 16 hours a day manifest. >> How can I have not just a single session of clot code or codeex or some of these agent harnesses? How can I have more of them? How can I do that appropriately? The agent part is now taken for granted. Now the claw-like entities are taken for granted and now you can have multiple of them and now you can have instructions to them and now you can have optimization over the instructions. But there I mean this is why it gets to the psychosis is that this is like infinite and everything is skill issue. Hi listeners, welcome back to No Briars. Today I'm here with Andre Karpathy and we have a wide-ranging conversation for you about code agents, the future of engineering and AI research, how more people can contribute to research, what's happening in robotics, his prediction for how agents can reach out into the real world, and education in this next age. Welcome, Andre. Andre, thanks for doing this. Yeah, thank you for having me. >> Uh, so it's been a very exciting couple of months in AI. >> Uh, yeah, you could say that. >> I remember um walking into the office at some point and you were like really locked in and I was asking what you were up to and you're like, I just I have to code for 16 hours a day or code's not even the right verb anymore, right? But I have to >> um express my will to my agents for 16 hours a day. Manifest um because like there's been a jump in capability. >> Uh what's happening? and tell me about your experience. >> Yeah, I kind of feel like I was just in this perpetual I still am often in this state of AI psychosis just like all the time. Uh because there was a huge unlock in what you can achieve as a person as an individual, right? Because you were bottlenecked by you know your typing speed and so on. But now with these agents, it really I would say in December is when it really just something flipped where I kind of went from 8020 of like you know uh to like 2080 of writing code by myself versus just delegating to agents. And I don't even think it's 2080 by now. I think it's a lot more than that. I don't think I've typed like a line of code probably since December basically. Um, which is like an extremely large uh change. Um, I was talking to it like for example I was talking about it to for example my parents and so on and I don't think like a normal person actually realizes that this happened or how dramatic it was like literally like if you just find a random software engineer or something like that at their at their desk and what they're doing like their default workflow of you know building software is completely different as of basically December. Uh so I'm just like in this state of psychosis of trying to figure out like what's possible uh trying to push it to the limit. How is it how can I have not just a single session of you know um clot code or codecs or some of these agent harnesses. How can I have more of them? How can I do that uh appropriately? And then how can I use these claws? What are these claws? Uh and uh so there's like a lot of new things. I want to be at the forefront of it, you know, and I'm very antsy that I'm not at the forefront of it. And I see lots of people on Twitter doing all kinds of things and they all sound like really good ideas and I need to be at the forefront or I feel extremely nervous. And so I guess I'm just in this psychosis of like what's possible like because it's unexplored fundamentally. >> Well, if you're nervous, the rest of us are nervous. We have a uh we have a team that we work with at conviction that their setup is everybody is like, you know, none of the engineers write code by hand and they they're all microphoned and they just like whisper to their agents all the time. It's the strangest work setting ever. Uh, and I thought they were crazy and now I like I fully accept I was like, "Oh, this was the way." Like you're just ahead of it. >> Um, what uh how do you think about your own capacity now to like explore or to do projects like what is it limited by? >> Yeah. What is it limited by? Uh just I think everything like so many things even if they don't work I think to a large extent you feel like it's skill issue. It's not that the capability is not there. It's that you just haven't found a way to string it together of what's available. like I just don't I didn't give good enough instructions in the agents MD file or whatever it may be. I don't have a nice enough memory tool that I put in there or something like that. So it all kind of feels like skills when it doesn't work to some extent. You want to see how you can paralyze them etc. And you want to be Peter Steinberg basically. Uh so Peter is famous. He has a funny photo where he's in front of a monitor with lots of uh like uh he uses codecs. So lots of codecs agents styling the the monitor and they all take about 20 minutes if you prompt them correctly and you use the high effort. And so they all take about 20 minutes. they have multiple, you know, 10 repos checked out and so he's just um going between them and giving them work. It's just like you can you can you can move in much larger macro actions. It's not just like here's a line of code, here's a new function. It's like here's a new functionality and delegate it to agent one. Here's a new functionality that's not going to interfere with the other one. Give it a two and then try to uh review their work as best as you can depending on how much you care about that code. Like what are these macro actions that I can like manipulate my software repository by? and like another agent is doing some like research and another agent is writing code, another one is coming up with a plan for some new implementation. And so everything just like happens in these like macro actions over your repository. Um, and you're just trying to become like really good at it and develop like a muscle memory for it is extremely um, yeah, it's very rewarding number one because it actually works. Uh, but it's also kind of like the new thing to learn. So that's why hence the psychosis. Yeah, I I do feel like my instinct is like whenever I am waiting for an agent to complete something, the obvious thing to do is like, well, I can do more work, right? Like if I have access to more tokens, then like I should just paralyze add more tasks. And so that that's very stressful because if you >> don't feel very bounded by your ability to spend on tokens, then you know you are the bottleneck in the system that is max capability. >> Yeah. you're not maximizing your subscription at least and ideally for multiple agents like if you run out of the kod on codecs you should switch to cloud or whatnot I don't know like that's what I've been trying to do a little bit and I feel nervous when I have subscription left over uh that just means I haven't maximized my token throughput so I actually kind of experienced this when I was a PhD student you would feel nervous when your GPUs are not running like you have GPU capability and you're not maxing out the available flops to you but now it's not about flops it's about tokens uh so what is your token throughput and what token throughput do you command I would actually argue that it's very interesting that we had you know at least 10 years where in many engineering tasks people just did they didn't feel compute bound >> right um and like the entire industry feels that now they feel like they they they felt resource bound >> uh and now that you have this big capability jump you're like oh actually it's not you know my ability to access the compute anymore like I'm I'm the binding constraint >> yeah it's a skill issue >> which is very empowering cuz um yeah cuz you could be getting better. So that's why that's why I think it's very addictive because there's unlocks when you when you get better. >> Where do you think it goes? Like if you just think about like okay you know Andre is iterating and everybody else is for 16 hours a day getting better at using coding agents like what does it look like in a year of like you've reached mastery? >> Yeah. What does mastery look like right at the end of the year or like two three years 5 years 10 years etc. >> Well I think everyone is basically interested in like going up the stack. So I would say yeah it's not about a single session with your agent. Um multiple agents how do they collaborate and teams and so on. So everyone's trying to figure out what that looks like. And then I would say claw is also kind of an interesting direction because it really when I say a claw I mean this like layer that uh kind of takes persistence to a whole new level. Like it's something that like keeps looping is is like um it's not something that you are interactively in the middle of. It kind of like has its own little sandbox its own little you know it kind of like does stuff on your behalf even if you're not looking kind of thing. um and then also has like maybe more sophisticated memory systems etc that are not yet implemented in agents. So open claw has a lot more sophisticated memory I would say than what you would get by default uh which is just a memory compaction when your context runs out. Right. >> You think that's the piece that resonated for more users versus like perhaps like broader tool access >> for open claw. >> Yeah. There there's like I think there's at least I think >> there's a lot of really good ideas in here. Yeah. Good job Peter. >> I mean Peter has done a really amazing job. Um I saw him recently uh and I talked to him about it and I he's very humble about it but I think he innovated simultaneously in like five different ways and put it all together. Um so for example like the soul and D document like he actually really crafted a personality that is kind of compelling and interesting and I feel like a lot of the current agents they don't get this correctly. I actually think a clot has a pretty good personality. It feels like a teammate >> uh and it's excited with you etc. Uh, I would say um, for example, Codex is a lot more dry. Um, which is kind of interesting because in ChachiPT CEX is like a lot more upbeat and highly cyclical. But I would say Codex the coding agent is very dry. It doesn't it doesn't seem to care about what you're creating. It's kind of like, oh, I implemented it. It's like, okay, but do you understand what we're building? >> It's true. >> You know, it doesn't it. The other thing I would say is for example with Claude I think they dial the psychopasy fairly well where when Claude gives me praise I do feel like I slightly deserve it >> because sometimes I kind of give it like not very wellformed thoughts and uh I give it an idea that I don't think it's fully baked and it doesn't actually react very strongly. It's like oh yeah we can implement that. But when it's a really good idea by my own account, it does seem to reward it a bit more. And so I kind of feel like I'm trying to like earn its praise which is really weird. >> And so I do think the personality matters a lot. uh and I think a lot of the other uh tools maybe don't appreciate as much and I think in this aspect also Peter really cares about this and so that was correct and then the memory system and then uh just you know he's just having fun with this um and then the the single WhatsApp portal to all of the automation. >> Yeah. Is there something that you have done personally with your claws beyond software engineering that you think is fun or interesting? >> Yeah. So in January I had a claw I went through a period of claw psychosis. So, I built um I have a claw basically that takes care of my home and I call him Dobby the elf claw. Um and uh basically I used uh the agents to find all of the smart home subsystems of my home on the local area network which I was kind of surprised that worked out of the box. Like I just told it that I think I have Sonos at home. Like can you try to find it? and it goes and it did like IP scan of all the um basically um computers on the local area network and it found the Sonos thing uh the Sonos uh system and it turned out that there's no password protection or anything like that. I just logged in and it's like oh yeah you have these Sonos systems installed I let me try to reverse engineer how it's working. It does some web searches and it finds like okay these are the API endpoints and then it's like do you want to try it? And I'm like whoa like you just did that. And I'm like, "Yeah, can you try to play something in the study?" And uh it does and music comes out and I'm like, "I can't believe I just >> That's crazy. That's like three prompts." Yeah. >> I can't believe I just typed in like, "Can you find my sonos?" And that suddenly it's playing music. And it did the same for lights. And so basically like it kind of hacked in, figured out the whole thing. Uh created APIs, created a dashboard so I could see the command kind of center of like all of my lights in the home. And then it was like switching lights on and off. And you know, so I can ask it like Dobby at sleepy time. And when it's sleepy time, that just means all the lights go off, etc. and so on. So, it controls all of my lights, my HVAC, my shades, uh the pool and uh spa and also my security system. So, I have a camera pointed outside of the house and anytime someone rolls in, I have a Quinn uh a Quinn model that looks at the videos. So, first of all, there's change detection, right? >> And then based on change detection, it goes to Quinn and then it actually like tells me um it sends me a text to my WhatsApp. It shows an image from the outside and it says, "Hey, a FedEx truck just pulled up. FedEx truck just pulled up and you might want to check it and you got me mail or something like that. And Dobby just text me this this really incredible. Um so so Dobby is in charge of the house. I text through with it through WhatsApp. Um and it's been like really fun to have these macro actions that maintain my house. I haven't like really pushed it uh like way more beyond that and I think people are doing a lot more crazy things with it. Uh but for me even just a home automation setup, I used to use like six apps, completely different apps and I don't have to use these apps anymore. Like Doby controls everything in natural language. It's amazing. Um, and so I think like I haven't even pushed a paradigm fully, but already that is so helpful and so inspiring I would say. >> Do you think that's indicative of like what people want from a user experience perspective with software, right? Because I I don't think you know it's pretty ignored that it takes humans effort to like learn new software like new UI. Yeah, I think uh to some extent that's right. It's like working backwards from how people think an AI should be because what people have in their mind of like what an AI is is not actually what an LLM is by by like in a raw sense like LLM is a token generator, you know, like more tokens come out, but what they think of is like this p this persona identity that they can tell stuff and it remembers it, you know, and it's just kind of an entity behind a WhatsApp. It's like a lot more understandable. Mhm. >> Uh so I think to some extent it's like matching the expectations that humans already have for what an AI should behave but under the hood it's like a lot of technical details go into that and LLMs are too raw of a primitive to actually um type check as AI I think for most people if that makes sense. >> Yeah. Um I think that's like how we understand what the AI is and like the um description of it as Dobby or some personality obviously resonates with people. Um, I also think that it uh the unification that you did across your six different software systems for your home automation speaks to a different question of like >> do people really want all the software that we have today? >> Yeah. >> Right. Um because I I would argue like well you have the hardware >> but you've now thrown away the software >> or the the UX layer of it. Um do you think that's what people want? >> Yeah. I think there's this like there's this sense that these apps that are in the app store for using these smart home devices etc. uh these shouldn't even exist kind of in a certain sense like shouldn't it just be APIs and shouldn't agents be just using it directly and um wouldn't it like I can do all kinds of home automation stuff that uh any individual app will not be able to do right um and an LLM can actually drive the tools and call all the right tools and do do pretty complicated things um >> and so in a certain sense it does point to this like maybe there's like an overproduction of lots of custom bespoke apps that shouldn't exist because agents kind of like crumble them up and everything should be a lot more just like exposed API endpoints and agents are the glue of the intelligence that actually like tool calls all the all the parts. Um, another example is like my treadmill. Uh, there's an app for my treadmill and I wanted to like keep track of how often I do my cardio. Uh, but like I don't want to like log into a web UI and go through a flow and etc. Like all this should just be like make APIs available and this is kind of you know going towards the agentic um sort of web or like agent first uh tools and all this kind of stuff. So I think the industry just has to reconfigure in so many ways that it's like the customer is not the human anymore. It's like agents who are acting on behalf of humans and this refactoring will be will probably be substantial in a certain sense. One way that people sometimes push back on this is like do people do do we expect people to v code some of these tools? Do we expect normal people to do this kind of stuff that I described? >> But I think to some extent >> this is just you know technology as it exists today and right now there is some vibe coding and I'm actually watching it and I'm working with the system. But I kind of feel like this kind of stuff that I just talked about this should be free like in a year or two or three. There's no back coding involved. This is trivial. This is table stakes. This is like any AI even the open source models etc can like do this. >> You should be able to translate from a less technical humans intent very easily to this >> extremely easily. Yeah. Today it's vi coding it's involved and not many people are going to do it. But >> and you still have to make some design decisions, right? We were talking about like you take frames for example. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. But I kind of feel like this will just uh start to the barrier will just come down and it's just ephemeral software on your behalf and some kind of like claw is handling all the details for you but you're not involved. Claw has a >> claw has a machine and it will figure it out and it's just presenting you UIs and you're like saying stuff you know. Mhm. >> Why haven't you um I guess like pushed the boundaries of what you can do personally with Claus? Like is it you know you're focusing on more important projects, auto research, etc. or uh you're climbing the hill to mastery or something else, right? >> Yeah. I just feel like I'm so distracted by everything. So I spend I spent like a week on the class stuff and I I have more to do almost. Um but I will say that um >> like Jensen tools were all just busier unfortunately. >> Yeah. Uh, I didn't really take advantage of a lot of like email and calendar and all this other stuff and I didn't give it access because I'm still a little bit like suspicious and it's still very new and rough around the edges. So, I didn't want to give it like full access to my digital life yet. And part of it is just the security, privacy and uh just being very cautious in that in that realm. And um, so some of it is like held back by that I would say. Yeah, maybe that's like the dominant dominant feature, but some of it is also just I feel so distracted because I feel like I had a week of claw and then other stuff is happening. And >> what was the um I mean you've talked about like being able to train or at least optimize a a model as a task you want to see agents do for a long time like what was the motivation behind auto research? >> Auto research. Yeah. So I think like I had a tweet earlier where I kind of like said something along the lines of to get the most out of the tools that have become available now you have to remove yourself as the as the bottleneck. You can't be there to prompt the next thing. You're you need to take yourself outside. um you have to arrange things such that they're completely autonomous and the more you you know how can you maximize your token throughput and not be in the loop. This is the this is the goal and so I kind of mentioned that the the name of the game now is to increase your leverage. uh I put in just very few tokens just once in a while and a huge amount of stuff happens on my behalf and so auto research like I tweeted that and I think people liked it and whatnot but that they haven't like maybe worked through like the implications of that and for me auto research is an example of like an implication of that >> where it's like I don't want to be like the researcher in the loop like looking at results etc like I'm I'm holding the system back so the question is how do I refactor all the abstractions so that I'm not I have to arrange it once and hit go the name of the game is how can you get more agents running for longer periods of time without your involvement doing stuff on your behalf and auto research is just yeah here's an objective here's a metric here's your boundaries of what you can and cannot do and go and uh yeah >> you were surprised at its effectiveness >> yeah I I didn't expect uh it to work because so I have the project data chat um and fundamentally like I think a lot of people are very confused with my obsession for like training GBT2 models and so on but for me uh training GBT models and so on is just a little harness a little playground for training LLMs and fundamentally what I'm more interested in is like this idea of recursive self-improvement and to what extent you can actually have LLMs improving LLMs because I think all the Frontier Labs this is like the thing >> uh for obvious reasons and they're all trying to recursively self-improve roughly speaking and so for me this is kind of like um a little play pen of that um and I guess I like tuned Namat already quite a bit by hand in a good old fashioned way that I'm used to like I'm a researcher I've done this for like you know two decades I have some amount of like what is the opposite of >> uh yeah >> earned confidence >> okay I have like two decades of like oh I've trained this model like thousands of times of like um so I've done a bunch of experiments I've done hyper primary tuning I've done all the things I'm very used to and I've done for two decades and I've gotten to a certain point and I thought it was like fairly well tuned and then I let auto research go for like overnight and it came back with like tunings that I didn't see >> and yeah I did forget like the weight decay on the value embeddings and my atom betas were not sufficiently tuned and these things jointly interact so like once you tune one thing the other things have to potentially change too you know I shouldn't be a bottleneck like I shouldn't be running these hyperparameter search optimizations. I shouldn't be looking at the results. There's objective criteria in this case. Uh so you just let you just have to arrange it so that it can just go forever. So that's a single sort of version of auto research of like a single loop trying to improve. And I was surprised that it um it found these things that I you know the repo is already fairly well tuned and still found something. And that's just a single it's a single loop like these frontier labs they have GPU clusters of tens of thousands of them. And so it's very easy to imagine how you would basically get a lot of this automation on um smaller models and fundamentally everything around like frontier level intelligence is about extrapolation and scaling loss and so you basically do a ton of the exploration on the smaller models and then you try to um extrapolate out. >> So you're saying our research efforts are going to get more efficient like we're going to have better direction for when we scale as well if we can do this experimentation better. Yeah, I would say that like the most interesting project and probably what the frontier labs are working on is uh you know you experiment on the smaller models. You try to make it as autonomous as possible. Remove researchers from the loop. Uh they have way too much what is the what is the opposite? Way too much confidence. Yeah, they don't know. They shouldn't be touching any of this really and so you have to like rewrite the whole thing because right now I mean certainly they can contribute ideas but okay uh they shouldn't actually be enacting those ideas. There's a queue of ideas and there's maybe an automated scientist that comes up with ideas based on all the archive papers and GitHub repos and it funnels ideas in or researchers can contribute ideas but it's a single queue and there's workers that pull uh items and they try them out and uh whatever works just gets uh sort of put on the feature branch and maybe some people like um monitor the feature branch and merge to the main branch sometimes. So yeah, just removing humans uh from all the processes and automating as much as possible and getting high tok tokens per second throughputs and it does require rethinking of all the abstractions. Um and uh everything has to be reshuffled. So yeah, I think it's very exciting. If >> we take one more recursive step here, um uh when is the model going to write a better program MD than you? >> Yeah. Uh so program MD is >> we're not in the loop. >> Yeah, exactly. >> Yeah. Um, so program MD is my crappy attempt at describing like how the auto researcher should work like oh do this then do that and that and then try these kinds of ideas and then here's maybe some ideas like look at architecture look at optimizer etc. I just came up with this in markdown, right? >> Um >> and so uh yeah, exactly. You want some kind of an auto research loop maybe that looks for you can imagine that different program NDS would um would give you different uh progress. So you basically every research organization is described by program MD. Yeah, >> a research organization is a set of markdown files that describe all the roles and how the whole thing connects. Um and you can imagine having a better research organization. So maybe they do fewer stand-ups in the morning because they're useless. And this is all just code, right? Um and so you can so one organization can have fewer stand-ups, one organization can have more uh one organization can be very risk-taking, one organization can be less. And so you can definitely imagine that you have multiple research orgs. Um and then they all have code and once you have code, then you can imagine tuning the code. So 100% there's like the meta layer of it. Uh um >> did you see my text about my contest idea? My contest idea was uh like let people write uh different program MDs, right? And and so for same hardware, where do you get most improvement? >> Oh, I see. >> And then you can take all that data and then give it to the model and say write a better program MD. >> Yes. Yes. >> Yeah. Exactly. >> We're going to get something better. Like there's no way we don't. >> You can 100% look at um where the improvements came from and like can I change the program MD such that more of these kinds of things would be done or like things that didn't work. uh >> meta optimization. Yeah, >> you can 100% imagine doing that. So I think this is a great idea, but it's like you know I think like you sort of go one step at a time where you sort of have one process and then second process and then the next process and these are all layers of an onion like the LLM sort of part is now taken for granted. The agent part is now taken for granted. Now the claw-like entities are taken for granted and now you can have multiple of them and now you can have instructions to them and now you can have optimization over the instructions and it's just like it's a little too much you know but there I mean this is why it gets to the psychosis is that this is like infinite and everything is still issue and that's why I feel like yeah that's just coming back to this is why it's so insane. Okay. Well, if we're we're just trying to like diagnose the current moment and uh what is a relevant skill right now, what do you like what do you think is the implication that this um that this is the loop we should be trying to achieve in different areas and that it works right like you know remove >> create the metric or create the ability for um agents to continue working on it without you. >> Yeah. >> Do we still have performance engineering like >> Yeah. I mean so there's a few caveats that I would put on top of the LM ecosystem. Number one, >> uh this is extremely well suited to anything that has objective uh metrics that are easy to evaluate. So for example, like writing kernels for more efficient CUDA, you know, code for various parts of a model, etc. are the perfect fit. >> Because you have inefficient code and then you want efficient code that has the exact same behavior, but it's much faster, perfect fit. >> Uh so a lot of things like like are perfect fit for auto research, but many things will not be and so they it's just if you can't evaluate then you can't auto research it, right? Uh so that's like caveat number one. And then maybe caveat number two I would say is, you know, we're we're kind of talking about next steps and we kind of see what the next steps are, but fundamentally the the whole thing still doesn't it's still kind of like bursting at the seams a little bit and there's cracks and it doesn't fully work. And if you kind of try to go too far ahead, the whole thing is actually net not useful if that makes sense. >> Um because these models like still are not, you know, they've improved a lot, but they're still like rough around the edges is maybe the way I would describe it. I simultaneously feel like I'm talking to an extremely brilliant PhD student who's been like a systems programmer for their entire life and a 10-year-old. And it's so weird because humans like there's I feel like they're a lot more coupled. Like you have, you know, um everything >> you wouldn't you wouldn't encounter that combination. >> This jaggedness is really strange and humans have a lot less of that kind of jaggedness. Although they definitely have some, but humans have a lot more jaggedness. uh sorry the agents have a lot more jaggedness where uh sometimes like you know I ask for functionality and it like comes back with something that's just like totally wrong and then we get into loops that are totally wrong and then I'm just I get so frustrated with the agents all the time still because you feel the power of it but you also there's still like it does nonsensical things once in a while for me still as well >> I get very annoyed when um uh I feel like the agent wasted a lot of compute on something it should have recognized was an obvious problem. >> Yeah, I think like some of the bigger things is like maybe what's under underneath it, if I could hypothesize, is fundamentally these models are trained via reinforcement learning. So they're actually struggling with the exact same thing we just talked about, which is the labs can improve the models in anything that is verifiable, whether has rewards. So did you write the program correctly and does it do the unit test check out? Yes or no? But some of the things where they're struggling is like for example, I think they have a tough time with like nuance of maybe what I what I had in mind or what I intended and when to ask clarifying questions. Um like what I yeah it's just um anything that feels softer is like worse. And so you're kind of like you're either on Rails and you're part of the super intelligence circuits or you're not on Rails and you're outside of the verifiable domains and suddenly everything kind of just like meanders. Like maybe another way to put it is if you go to if today if you go to like state-of-the-art model chachi PT and you ask it tell me a joke um do you know what joke you're going to get? There's the joke. >> The joke I do feel I I I can't tell you like the you know standard form of it but I do feel like Chach has like three jokes. >> Yeah. Yeah. So the the joke that apparently all thems like laugh the most is why do scientists uh not trust atoms? >> Okay. >> Because they make everything up. >> Okay. >> They make everything up. So this is >> how did that emerge? >> So this is the joke you would get like three or four years ago and this is the joke you still get today. >> Okay. >> So even though the models have improved tremendously. >> Yeah. >> And if you give them an agentic task, they will just go for hours and move mountains for you. >> And then you ask for like a joke and it has a stupid joke, a crappy joke from 5 years ago. And it's because it's outside of the it's outside of the RL. >> It's outside of the reinforcement learning. It's outside of what's being improved. It's like and it's part of the jaggedness of like shouldn't you expect models as they get better to also have like better jokes or more diversity of them or it's just it's not being optimized and it's stuck. >> Do you uh uh think that that implies that we are not seeing like generalization in the sense of like broader intelligence of joke smartness being attached to code smartness. Yeah, I think there's some decoupling where some things are verifiable and some things are not and some things are optimized for arbitrarily by the labs depending on like what data went in and some things are not and um >> and >> but I mean the the premise there's a you know premise from some research groups that if you are smarter at code generation or in these ver verifiable fields you should be better at everything and and like the the the joke situation suggests that that's not happening in all >> I don't think that's happening. Yeah, I don't think that's happening. I think uh I think maybe we're seeing like a little bit of that but not like a satisfying amount. >> Yeah, that agonist exists in humans. >> You can be very very good at math and still tell a really bad joke. >> Yeah, that's true. Yeah, but it just it still means that we're not getting like the story is that we're getting a lot of the intelligence and capabilities in all the domains of society like for free as we get better and better models. And that's not like exactly fundamentally what's going on. And there's some blind spots and some things are not being optimized for. And this is all clustered up in these neural net opaque models, right? So you're either on rails of what it was trained for and everything is like you're going at speed of light or you're not. Um and so it's jaggedness. So um so that's why I think like even though the the progression is obvious what should happen, you can't let it fully go there yet because it doesn't fully work or it's a skill issue and we just haven't like figured out how to use it. So you know it's hard to tell. Can I ask kind of a blasphemous question which is like if this jaggedness is persisting um and it's all rolled up in a uh at least monolithic interface right but you know single model >> um does that make sense or do do you should should it be unbundled into things that are can be optimized and improved against different >> domains of intelligence >> uh like unbundling the models into multiple experts in different areas etc >> more directly yeah >> um >> instead of juste that we have no exposure to that can be confusing as a why is it so good at this but not at this other thing. >> Yeah, I think currently my impression is the labs are trying to have a single sort of like monoculture of a model that is arbitrarily intelligent in all these different domains and they just stuff it into the parameters. I do think that we will we I I I do think we should expect more speciation in the um intelligences. Um like you know the animal kingdom is extremely diverse in the brains that exist and there's lots of different niches of uh of nature and some animals have overdeveloped visual cortex or other part kind of parts and I think we we should be able to see more speciation and um you don't need like this oracle that knows everything. and you kind of speciate it and then you put it on a specific task. And we should be seeing some of that because you should be able to have like much smaller models that still have the cognitive core like they're still competent but then they specialize and then um and then they can become more efficient in terms of latency or throughput on uh specific tasks that you really care about like if you're a mathematician working in lean. I saw for example there's a few releases that really like target that as a domain. Um uh so there's a probably going to be a few examples like that where the unbundling kind of makes sense. One question I have is whether or not uh the capacity constraint on available compute infrastructure >> drives more of this because efficiency Yeah. actually matters more, right? Like your >> if you financing aside though financing is involved in all of this, if you have access to full compute for anything you do, like even one single model, right? But if you actually feel pressure where you're like I can't serve >> um a model of massive size for every use case >> like do you think that leads to any speciation? Does that question make sense to you? The question makes sense and I guess like what I'm what I'm what I what I'm struggling with is I don't think we've seen too much speciation just yet, right? >> No. >> Uh we're seeing a monoculture of models. >> Yeah. >> So um >> and there's like clearly pressure for like make a good code model, put it back in the main merge again. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Um even though there already is pressure on the models. >> I guess perhaps I I feel like there's a lot of very short-term supply crunch and like maybe that causes more speciation now. >> Yeah. Yeah, I think fundamentally like the the the labs are serving a model and they don't really know what the end user is going to be asking about. Uh so maybe that's like some part of it because they kind of have to multitask over all the possible things that could be asked. But I think if you're coming to a business and maybe partnering on some specific problems you care about, then maybe you would see that there. Um or there would be some very high value applications that are like more niche. Um but uh I think right now they're kind of like going after the totality of what's available. I don't think that the science of manipulating the brains is like fully developed yet partly. >> What do you mean manipulating? >> So like so fine-tuning without losing capabilities as an example and we don't have these primitives for actually like working with the intelligences in ways other than just context windows like context windows kind of just just work and it's very cheap to manipulate etc. And this is how we're getting some of the customization etc. Uh but I think if it was I think it's a it's a bit more of a developing science of how you like more deeply adjust the models, how you have continual learning maybe or how you um how you fine-tune in a certain area, how you get better in a certain area or like how you actually touch the weights, not just the context windows. And so it's a lot more tricky, I would say, to touch the weights than just the context windows. Uh because you're actually fundamentally changing the full model and potentially its intelligence. And so um so maybe it's just like not a fully developed science, if that makes sense, of speciation. A and it also has to be like cheap enough >> for that speciation to be worthwhile in these given >> contexts. Can I ask a question about uh like uh an extension to auto research that you described in terms of um open ground? You said okay well you know we have this thing >> um we need more collaboration surface around it essentially for people to contribute um to research overall. Can you talk about that? Yeah. So, we talked about our research has a single thread of like I'm going to try stuff in loop, but fundamentally uh the paralization of this is like the interesting component. Um, and I guess I was trying to like play around with a few ideas, but I don't have anything that like clicks as simply as like I don't have something that I'm like super happy with just yet, but it's something I'm like working on on the side when I'm not working on my claw. Um so I think like one issue is if you have a bunch of nodes uh of paralization available to you then it's very easy to just have multiple auto researchers talking through um a common system or something like that. What I was more interested in is how you can have an untrusted pool of workers out there on the internet. >> So for example in auto research uh you're just trying to find um the piece of code that trains a model to a very low validation loss. If anyone gives you a candidate commit, it's very easy to verify that that commit is correct, is good. Like they someone could claim from the internet that this piece of code will optimize uh much better and give you much better performance. You could just check very easy, but probably a lot of work goes into that checking. Uh but fundamentally they could lie and etc. So you're basically dealing with a similar kind of it's almost actually like looks a little bit like my my designs that incorporate an untrusted pool of workers uh actually look a little bit more like a blockchain a little bit. uh because instead of blocks, you have uh commits and these commits can build on each other and they contain like changes to the code as you're improving it. Um and uh the proof of work is basically doing tons of experimentation to find the commits that work. >> Um and that's hard. Um and then the reward is just being on the leaderboard right now. There's no monetary reward whatsoever. uh but I don't want to push the analogy too far but it fundamentally has this issue where you a huge amount of search goes into it but it's very cheap to verify that a candidate solution is indeed good because you can just train a single you know someone had to try 10,000 ideas but you just have to check that the thing that they produced actually works >> because the 99,000 of them didn't work you know >> um and so basically long story short is like you have to come up with a system where an untrusted pool of workers can collaborate with a trusted pool of workers uh that do the verification And the whole thing is kind of like asynchronous and works and um and so on and uh it's it's like safe from a security perspective because if anyone sends you arbitrary code and you're going to run it that's very sketchy and dodgy. So um but fundamentally it should be totally possible. So you're familiar with projects like seti at home and folding at home all of these problems have a similar kind of setup. So folding at home you're folding a protein um and it's very hard to find a configuration that is low energy. But if someone finds a configuration that they evaluate to be low energy that's perfect you can just use it. you can easily verify it. So a lot of things have this property that you know very expensive to come up with but very cheap to verify and so in all those cases things like folding at home or seti at home or auto research at home will be good fits. And so, um, long story short, a swarm of agents on the internet could collaborate to improve LLMs and could potentially even like run circles around Frontier Labs. Like, who knows, you know? Um, yeah, like maybe that's even possible. Like, Frontier Labs have a huge amount of trusted compute, but the Earth is much bigger and has huge amount of untrusted compute. But if you put systems in check uh systems in place that you know deal with this then maybe it is possible that the swarm out there could uh could come up with with better with better solutions and people kind of like contribute cycles um to to a thing that they care about. And so sorry so the last thought is uh lots of companies or whatnot they could maybe have like their own uh things that they care about and you if you have compute capacity you could contribute to different kind of auto research tracks like maybe you care about certain you know like you care about like cancer or something like that of certain type you don't have just donate money to an institution you actually could like purchase compute and then you could join the auto resource forum for that project you know uh so if everything is rebundled into other researchers then compute becomes the thing that you're contributing to the pool. Yeah, that's very inspiring. And it's also interesting like I don't I don't know how far this goes, but it is interesting that at least some audience of people, you know, here in Silicon Valley or lining up at um you know, retail stores in China have discovered that like having access to personal compute is interesting again. >> Yeah. >> Right. So maybe they're really motivated to do that for their claws and then they can contribute to auto research. >> It's almost like dollars the thing everyone cares about, but is flop the thing that actually everyone cares about in the future? Like is there going to be like a flipping almost of like what the thing that you care about? Like right now for example, it's really hard to get compute even if you have money. >> Yeah. >> So actually it almost seems like the flop is like dominant uh in a certain sense. Um yeah. So uh so maybe that's kind of like kind of like that like how much how many flops do you control instead of like what wealth do you control? I don't actually think that's true but it's kind of interesting to think about. >> The last thing you released was like a little bit of jobs data analysis. Is that right? What um and might have touched a nerve even though you're just like visualizing some public data. Yeah. Uh what was you know what were you curious about? >> Yeah, I guess I was curious to um I mean everyone is like really it's everyone is really thinking about the impacts of AI on the job market and what's going to look like. So I was just interested to take a look like what does the job market look like? Where are the different roles? um and how many people are in different professions. And I was like really just interested to like look through uh the individual cases and try to think myself about like you know with these AIs and how they're likely to evolve like are these going to be tools that people are using? Are these going to be displacing tools for these uh professions and like what are the current professions and how are they going to change? Are they going to grow or uh adjust to a large extent or like what could be new professions? So it's really just like a way to fuel my own chain of thought about the industry I suppose. M >> um and so uh yeah the jobs data basically is just a Bureau of Labor Statistics they actually have um percent outlook for each profession about how much it's expected to grow over the next I think almost a decade. >> Uh yeah I think it's a decade but it was made in 2024. >> We need a lot of healthare workers. >> Yeah. So so they've already made those projections and I'm not sure actually 100% what the methodology was that they that they put into the projections. Um, I guess I was interested to color things by like if people think that what's like primarily being um developed now is this kind of like more digital AI that is kind of like almost like these ghosts or spirit entities that can like interact in the digital world and manipulate a lot of like digital information and they currently don't really have a physical embodiment or presence and the physical stuff is probably going to go slightly slower because you're manipulating atoms. So flipping flipping bits and and the ability to copy paste a digital information is like makes everything a million times faster than accelerating matter, you know. So um so energetically I just think we're going to see a huge amount of activity in digital space, huge amount of rewriting, huge amount of activity boiling soup and I think the we're going to see something that that in the digital space goes at the speed of light compared to I think what's going to happen in the physical world to some extent if would be the extrapolation. And so I think like there's currently kind of like I think overhang where there can be like a lot of unhobling almost potentially of like a lot of digital information processing that used to be done by computers and people and now with AI as like a third kind of manipulator of digital information. There's going to be a lot of refactoring in those in those uh disciplines. Um but the physical world is actually going to be like I think um behind that by some amount of time. And so I think what's really fascinating to me is like so that's why I was highlighting the the professions that fundamentally manipulate digital information. This is work you could do from your home etc. because I feel like those will be like things will change and it doesn't mean that there's going to be less of those jobs or more of those jobs because that has to do with like demand elasticity and many other factors but things will change in these professions because of these new tools and um because of this upgrade to the nervous system of the human superorganism if you want to think about it that way. Given the look you had at the data, do you have either any observations or um uh guidance for people facing the job market or thinking about what to study now or what skills to develop? I mean, we can all go get like I'm very thankful that I have to like meet people for my job right now. >> More physical. Yeah. >> Could you do your work from home though? Uh I could >> I think there are relationship parts of it that are hard, but most of it I could. >> Yeah. I think it's really hard to tell because again like the job market is extremely diverse and I think the answers will probably vary but uh to a large extent like these tools are extremely new, extremely powerful and so just being uh you know just trying to keep up with it is like the first thing um and um yeah because I think a lot of people kind of like dismiss it or >> or they're afraid of it >> or they're afraid of it etc which is totally understandable of course. Yeah, I think like um it's fundamentally an empowering tool at the moment. Um and these jobs are bundles of tasks and some of these tasks can go a lot faster and so people should think of it as primarily a tool that it is right now. Um and I think the long-term future of that is uncertain. Yeah, it's kind of really hard to forecast to be honest and like I'm not professionally like doing that really and I think it's a job of like economists to do properly. >> You are an engineer though. Uh and like one thing I thought was interesting is that like the uh demand for engineering jobs is continuing to increase. >> Yeah. >> Um I I can't tell if that's like a temporary phenomenon. I'm not sure how I feel about it yet. Do you know? >> Yeah. That's like the demand almost like uh software was scarce, right? And so the reason we don't have more demand for software is just it's scarcity and it's too expensive. >> Too expensive. Yeah. >> So if the barrier comes down then actually you have the Jevans paradox which is like you know you actually the demand for software actually goes up. It's cheaper and there's more more >> powerful. Yeah. the the classical example of this always is the ATMs and the bank tellers uh because there was a lot of like fear that um ATMs and computers basically uh would displace tellers but what happened is they made like the cost of operation of um of a bank branch much cheaper and so there were more bank branches so there were more tellers is like the canonical example people site uh but basically it's just paradox like something becomes cheaper so there's a lot of unlocked demand for it so I do think that that's probably I do have cautiously optimistic view of this in software engineering where I do um it does seem to me like the demand for software will be extremely large um and it's just become a lot cheaper and um so I do think that for quite some time um it's very hard to forecast but it does seem to me like right now at least locally there's going to be more demand for software um because software is amazing it's like you know digital information processing you're not forced to use like arbitrary tools that were given to you that are imperfect in various ways you're not forced to subscribe to what exists uh code is now ephemeral and it can change and it can be modified um and so I think there's going to be a lot of activity in the digital space to like rewire everything in a certain sense and I think it's going to create a lot of demand for for this kind of stuff I think long term um yeah obviously even with auto research like openi or or you know uh anthropic or these other labs like they're employing what like a thousand something researchers right >> these researchers are basically like glorified auto like you know >> they're like automating themselves away like actively and this is like the thing they're all trying to do. >> Yeah. >> I f like I went around um >> some of those researchers also feel feel the psychosis, right? Because they can it's working. Yeah. >> Right. And and so they're like oh it's over for me too. >> I did spend a bunch of time going around opening eye and I was like you guys realize if we're successful like we're all out of job like >> like it's just we're just building automation for Sam or something like that. like I or the board I'm not sure but like uh there's just building like this automation for yeah the board or the CEO or something like that and we're all out of our job and maybe um contributing on the sides and so yeah it's kind of like uh nerving from that perspective >> is it okay if I ask you Nome's question >> you know you could be doing that right auto researching with a lot of compute scale and a bunch of colleagues at one of the frontier labs like why not >> well I was there for a while right like and I did re-enter so to some extent I agree and I think that there are many ways to slice this question. It's a very loaded question a little bit. Um I will say that I feel very good about like what people can contribute in their impact uh outside of the frontier labs obviously not in the industry but also in like more like ecosystem level roles. Um so your role for example is more like ecosystem level. My role currently is also kind of more on ecosystem level and I feel very good about like impact that people can have in those kinds of uh roles. I think conversely there's there are definite problems in my mind for um uh for basically aligning yourself way too much with the frontier labs too. So fundamentally I mean you're you have a huge amount of financial incentive to uh with these frontier labs and by your own admission the uh the AIs are going to like really change humanity and society in very dramatic ways and here you are basically like building the technology and benefiting from it like and being like very allied to it through financial means like this was a conundrum that was in um at the heart of you know how open started in the beginning like this was the conundrum that we were trying to solve. M >> um and so you know that so it's kind of um >> it's still not the conundrum is still not like fully resolved. So that's number one. You you're not a completely free agent and you can't actually like be part of that conversation in a fully autonomous um free way like if you're inside one of the frontier labs like there are certain things that you can't say. Uh and conversely there are certain things that the organization wants you to say and you know they're not going to twist your arm but you feel the pressure of like what you should be saying you know cuz like obviously Otherwise, it's like really awkward conversations, strange side eyes, like what are you doing? You know, like so you can't like really be an independent agent and I I feel like a bit more ali like aligned with humanity in a certain sense outside of a frontier lab because uh I don't I'm not subject to those pressures almost, right? And I can't say whatever I want or yeah, I would say in the frontier labs like um you can have like uh impact there of course as well. So uh but there's many researchers and maybe you're one of them, maybe your ideas are really good, etc. Maybe there's a lot of decision-m to to do and you want to be in a position where you are in the room with those conversations when they come up. I do think that currently the stakes are like overall fairly low and so everything is kind of like nice but ultimately at the end of the day like when the stakes are really high etc. If you're an employee at an organization I don't actually know how much sway you're going to have on the organization what it's going to do like fundamentally at the end of the day um uh it's uh you're not like really in charge like you're in a room and you're contributing ideas but you're not like really in charge of that entity that you're that you're a part of. So those are like some sources of misalignment I think to some extent. I will say that like in one way I do agree a lot with that sentiment that um I do feel like and if uh like the labs for better or worse they're opaque and a lot of work is there and they're kind of like at the edge of capability and what's possible and they're working on what's coming down the line and I think if you're outside of the frontier lab uh your your judgment fundamentally will start to drift because you're not part of the you know what's coming down the line right and so I feel like my judgment will inevitably start to drift as well and uh I won't actually have an understanding of how these systems actually work under the hood that's an opaque system uh I won't have a a good understanding of how it's going to develop and etc. And so I do think that in that sense I agree and something I'm nervous about. I think it's worth basically bas uh being in touch with what's actually happening and actually being in the frontier lab and if if some of the frontier labs would have me come for you know some amount of time and do really good work for them and then maybe coming >> is looking for a job. This is super exciting. >> Yeah. >> Then I think that's maybe a good setup because I kind of feel like it kind of um you know um maybe that's like one way >> uh to to actually be connected to what's actually happening but also not feel like you're necessarily fully controlled by >> Yeah. >> by those entities. So I think honestly in my mind like uh Noom can probably get do extremely good work at uh at OI but also I think his most um impactful work could very well be outside of OpenAI. >> No that's a call to be an independent researcher with auto research. Yeah, there's many things to do on the outside and it's a it's a and I think ultimately I think the ideal solution maybe is like yeah going back and forth uh or um yeah and I think fundamentally you can have really amazing impact in both places. So very complic I don't know like it's a very loaded question a little bit but I mean I joined the frontier lab and now I'm outside and then maybe in the future I'll want to join again and I think um uh that's kind of like how I look at it. One question related to what visibility to does the world or the AI ecosystem have into uh the frontier is like how how close open sources to the frontier >> um and how sustainable that is. I I think yeah I think it is quite >> surprising the entire sequence of events actually from like having a handful of Chinese models and global models and I think people are going to continue releasing here in the near term that are closer than much of the industry anticipated from a capability perspective. >> Um I don't know if you're surprised by that but you're a long-term contributor to open source. Like what's your prediction here? Yeah. So roughly speaking basically the um yeah the closed models are ahead but like people are monitoring the number of months that sort of like open source models are behind. Um >> and it started with there's nothing and then it went to 18 months and now it's >> convergence right. So maybe they're behind by like what is the latest maybe like eight six months eight months kind of thing right now. Yeah I'm a huge fan of open source obviously. So for example in operating systems you have like closed like you know Windows and Mac OS. These are large software projects kind of like what LM are going to become and there's Linux but Linux is very easy like actually Linux is extremely successful project it runs on the vast majority of computers like last time I checked was it like 60% or something like run Linux um and that's because there is a need in the industry to have a common open platform that everyone feels uh sort of safe using I would say like the industry has always felt a demand for that kind of a project to exist and I think the same is true now and that's why businesses actually want there's demand for this kind of a um a thing to exist the big difference is that everything is capital. Uh there's a lot of capex that goes into this. >> Um so I think that's where things like fall apart a little bit make it a bit harder to to compete in certain sense. Uh I I do think that the current models are very good. The other thing that I think is like really interesting is that for the vast majority of like consumer use cases and things like that even like term open source models are actually quite good I would say and I think like if you go forward like more uh more years it does seem to mean like a huge amount of like simple use cases are going to be well covered and actually even run locally. Um, but there's going to be always like some demand for like frontier intelligence and that that can actually be extremely large piece of the pie. But it could be that the frontier the need for frontier intelligence is going to be like, you know, Nobel Prize kind of work or like let's move Linux from C to Rust. There's going to be like bigger projects, you know, like scoped in that kind of a way. And there's going to be maybe more um and maybe that's where a lot of the frontier closed intelligences were are going to be interacting with and open source is kind of like going to eat through a lot of the more basic use cases or something like that. You know at some point what is frontier today is going to be you know probably later this year what's frontier today in terms of what I'm using right now from the closed labs uh might be open source and that's going to be doing a lot of work. So I kind of expect that this dynamic will actually basically continue like we'll have Frontier Labs that have closed um AIS that are kind of like these oracles and then we'll have open source kind of like behind by some amount of months and I kind of expect that to uh to continue and I actually think that's like a pretty pretty good setup uh overall. Um because I I'm a little bit hesitant of having um I don't actually think it's like structurally I think there's some systemic risk attached to just having intelligences that are closed and that's like that's it. Mhm. >> And I think that that's uh you know centralization has a very poor track record in my view uh in in the past and has uh >> you mean like in political or economic systems in general. >> Yes. >> Exactly. I think there's like a lot of >> like Eastern European. Yeah. >> A lot of pretty bad president. So I want there to be a thing that is maybe not at the edge of capability because it's new and unexplored etc. But I want there to be a thing that's behind and that uh is kind of like a common working space for intelligences that the entire industry has access to. Yeah, that seems to me like a pretty decent power balance for the industry. >> Yeah, I also think there's just like there are many problems to solve, right? Like if you keep advancing intelligence from the frontier, we can do new things and there are a lot of like very big problems for humanity, right? And so like it seems that that will continue to be a very expensive game. And so I want to like root for labs that are doing that because there are problems we cannot solve without continuing to advance the models in a very expensive way. Yeah. And yet, as you point out, like >> if what we have today as Frontier is open, that's a lot of capability. Yeah. Right. And and so I I think you know the power of that or the democratization of that seems like >> very useful and also healthy. >> Yeah. I think basically by accident we're actually like in okay spot >> and optimal. Yeah. >> By accident we we are happen to be in a good spot in a certain sense. Um >> well and and to some degree the the longer this endures like this dynamic >> um the the healthier of a spot like the ecosystem might be in right because you have more and more area under the curve >> and I will say that even on the close side I almost feel like it's been like even further centralizing recently because I think a lot of the front runners are like not necessarily like the top tier and so yeah like in that sense I think it's um it's not super ideal. I would love there to be more more front to last because yeah I'm like by default very suspicious of like um I want there to be more people in the room. I want I think like in machine learning ensembles always outperform any individual model and so I want there to be ensembles of people thinking about all the hardest problems and I want there to be ensembles of people in the room when they um to be all well informed and to make all those decisions you know so uh I don't want it to be like a closed doors with two people or three people. I feel like that's like not a good not a good future. I almost wish like there were more labs is long story short and I I I do think that open source has a has a has a place to play. I hope it sticks around and I basically it's currently slightly behind and that's actually kind of like a good thing. >> Okay. you worked on the precursor to generalized robotics autonomy um in cars, right? Uh a a lot has happened in the last couple months with robotics companies as well like acceleration of really impressive generalization of environment of tasks like increasing long horizon tasks, lots of money going into the space like is it going to happen? Has anything in your view changed recently? >> So like my view is kind of informed by what I saw in self-driving and I do feel like self-driving is the first robotics application. So probably what I saw is at the time like 10 years ago there were a large number of startups and I kind of feel like um like most of them basically like didn't long-term make it. Um and what I saw is that like a lot of capital expenditure had to go in and a lot of time and so um I think it like I think robotics because it's so difficult and so messy and requires huge amount of capital investment and a lot of like con conviction um just it's like a big problem and I think items are really hard. So I kind of feel like they will lag be it will lag behind what's going to happen in digital space and in digital space there's going to be a huge amount of unhobling uh basically like things that weren't super efficient becoming a lot more efficient by like a factor of 100 >> because bits are so much easier and so I think currently in terms of what's going to change and like where the activity is I kind of feel like digital space is going to like change a huge amount and then the physical space will lag behind and what I find very interesting is like this interface in between them as well because I think in this If you we do have more agents acting on behalf of humans and more agents kind of like talking to each other and and doing tasks and participating in the kind of economy of agents etc. Um you're going to run out of things that you're going to do purely in a digital space. At some point you have to go to the universe and you have to ask it questions. Um you have to run an experiment and see what the universe tells you to get back to learn something. And so we currently have a huge amount of like digital work uh because there's an overhang in how much we collectively thought about what already is digital. So we just didn't have enough thinking cycles among the humans to think about all the information that is already digital and already uploaded. Um and so we're going to start running out of stuff that is actually like um already uploaded. Uh so you're going to at some point read all the papers and process them and have some ideas about what to try. But um yeah, we're just going to uh I don't actually know how much you can like get intelligence that's like fully closed off and with just information that's available to it, you know. And so I think what what's going to happen is first there's going to be huge amount of unhobling and I think there's a huge amount of work there. Then actually it's going to move to like the interfaces between physical and digital. So and that's like sensors of like seeing the world and actuators of like doing something to the world. So I think a lot of interesting companies will actually come from that interface of like can we feed the super intelligence in a certain sense data and can we actually like take data out and manipulate the physical world um per its bidding if you want to like interropomorphize the whole thing right and then the the physical world actually I almost feel like the the total addressable market etc in terms of like the amount of work and so on is is massive possibly even much larger maybe what can happen in digital space so I actually think it's like a much bigger opportunity as well but um I do feel like it's a huge amount of work and and in my in my mind the atoms are just like a a million times harder. So um so it will lag behind but it's also I think a little bit of bigger market. So it's kind of like uh yeah I think the opportunities kind of like follow that kind of trajectory. So right now this digital is like my main interest then interfaces would be like after that and then maybe like some of the physical things um like their time will come and they'll be huge when they do come. Well, it's it's an interesting framework for it too because uh certain things not the things I'm working on right now but certain things are much easier even in the world of atoms right like if you just think about like read and write to the physical world like read like sensors cameras like there's a lot of existing hardware and you can imagine like >> enriching agent capabilities or capturing a lot of new data if you're just clever about it and like you don't necessarily have to invest a lot to like get something valuable. >> Yeah. So like examples of this that I saw for example are you know a friend of mine Liam is running is a CEO of periodic I visited them last week so it's just on top of mind like they're trying to do auto research for material science >> um and so in that case it's like the sensors to the intelligence are actually like pretty expensive lab equipment and the same is true in biology. I think a lot of people are very interested in engineering biology and you know the sensors will be more than just like video cameras if that makes sense. And then the other thing I was I saw for example is companies that are trying to have um like you basically pay people for training data. Yeah. As an example to feed >> programmatically. >> Yeah. To feed to feed the Borg. Uh um and so like these are all examples of like sensors in a certain sense. So they take many diverse shapes and forms if that makes sense. >> Yeah. So I'm looking forward to the point where I can ask for a task in the physical world and I can put a price on it and just tell the agent like you know you figure out how to do it. Go get the data. >> I'm actually kind of surprised we don't have enough like information markets. Mhm. >> Like if for example if poly market or other betting markets or even stocks etc if they have so much autonomous activity and rising amount of activity >> like um why should like for example if Iran was just happening now like how come there isn't a process where like taking a photo or video from somewhere in Tan should cost like 10 bucks like someone should be able to pay for that you know like and that's an example of like feeding the intelligence there's not going to be a human looking at it it's going to be like agents who are trying to guess the betting games and stock markets and so on. M >> so I kind of feel like the agentic web is still like fairly new that there's no like mechanisms for this but this is an example of what I I think might happen there's a good book that maybe is inspiring called demon you potentially read it in Damon the intelligence um ends up like puppeteering almost a little bit like humanity in a certain sense you know and so humans are kind of like its actuators but humans are also like its sensors >> um and so I think like collectively like society will kind of like reshape in a certain way in uh to to serve that kind kind of a that will kind of like end up happening collectively across the industry where yeah there's just a lot more automation and has certain needs and kind of humans will be serving those needs of that of that machine not necessarily like to each other >> well we were um on this very specific point of uh like missing pieces of training data we needed um we needed something like auto research right like we we need the training cycle or the SFT piece to be uh far more mechanized >> for for what part >> in order to make the uh collection like in order to take the human out of the loop to ask for a task that is just like improve my model quality >> with new data, >> right? >> Uh yes. >> Does that make sense to you? Like we um if you can't have the model do the training runs by itself, >> then your ability to do this as a like closed loop task Yes. with u by pricing data Yeah. >> is um more challenged. >> Yes. Yes. 100%. Yeah. But now the thing is for LLM training it actually is like very easily it like really fits the paradigm. >> Um so you'd actually >> yeah clean metric >> yeah like LM training actually fits the paradigm really well really easily like all the optimization of all the code and so it runs faster and then you also have like metrics that you can optimize against. I do think that if you had an autonomous loop over those metrics there's going to be a lot of like good harding going on where the system will like overfitit to those metrics and so um but then you can use the system to devise more metrics and you just have really good coverage. So it's kind of hard to tell but um in a certain sense it's like a pretty pretty good fit. >> I want to talk about a little uh tiny side project you have before we end. Um tell me about the micro GPTR. >> Oh yeah. Okay. So micro GPT. So I have this like running obsession of like maybe a decade or two of just like simplifying and boiling down the uh basically LLMs uh to like their bare essence. And I've had a number of projects along these lines. So like nano GPT and um make more and uh micro GP microrad etc. So I feel like micro GPT is now the state-of-the-art of me trying to like just boil it down to just the essence because the thing is like training neural nets and LLMs specifically um it's a huge amount of code but all of that code is actually complexity from efficiency. >> It's just because you need it to go fast. If you don't need it to go fast and you just care about the algorithm then that algorithm actually is 200 lines of Python very simple to read and this includes comments and everything. Um because you just have like uh your data set which is a text um and you need your neural network architecture which is like 50 lines. You need to do your forward pass and then you have to do uh your backward pass to calculate the gradients. And so an little autograd engine uh to calculate the gradients is like 100 lines and then you need an optimizer an atom for example which is a very state-of-the-art optimizer is like again 10 lines really. And so putting everything together in a training loop is like yeah 200 lines. And it was interesting to me like normally before like maybe a year ago or more if I had come up with micro GPT I would be tempted to basically explain to people like I have a video like stepping through it or something like that. Uh and I actually tried to make that video a little bit and I tried to make like a little guide to it and so on but I kind of realized that this is is not really it's not really adding too much because people cuz it's already so simple that it's 200 lines that anyone could ask their agent to explain it in various ways and the agents like I'm not explaining to people anymore. I'm explaining it to agents. If you can explain it to agents, then agents can be the router and they can actually target it to the human in their language uh with infinite uh you know uh patience and uh just at their capability and so on. >> Right. If I don't understand um this particular function, I can ask the agent to explain it to me like three different ways and I'm not going to get that from you. >> Exactly. >> And so I kind of feel like you know what is education? like it used to be guides, it used to be lectures, it used to be this thing, but I feel like now more I'm explaining things to agents and maybe I'm coming up with skills uh where like um uh so basically skill is just a way to instruct the agent how to teach the thing. So maybe I could have a skill for micro GPT of the progression I imagine the agent should take you through if you're interested in understanding the codebase and it's just like hints to the model to like oh first start off with this and then with that and so I could just script the curriculum a little bit as a skill. Uh, so, uh, so I I don't feel like, um, yeah, I feel like there's going to be less of like explaining things directly to people and it's going to be more of just like does the agent get it? And if the agent gets it, they'll do the explanation. And we're not fully there yet because they I still can I still think I can probably explain things a little bit better than the agents, but I still feel like the models are improving so rapidly that um, I feel like it's a losing battle to some to some extent. Um and so I think uh education is going to be kind of like reshuffled by this quite substantially uh where it's the end of like teaching each other things almost a little bit like if I have a um library for example of code or something like that it used to be that you have documentation for other people who are in my user library but like you shouldn't do that anymore like you should have instead of HTML documents for humans you have markdown documents for agents because if agents get it then they can just explain all the different parts of it. So it's this redirection through agents, you know, um, and that's like, so I think we're going to see a lot more of that playing out. >> Well, we'll see if the great teachers know like to develop intuition for how to explain things to agents differently. >> Ultimately, so for example, micro GPT like I asked I tried to get an agent to write micro GPT. So I told it like try to boil down the simplest things like try to boil down um, neural networking to the simplest thing and can't do it. like micro GPT is like my is it's like my end of my obsession. It's the 200 lines. I thought about this for a long time. I was obsessed about this for a long time. This is this is the solution. Trust me, it can't get simpler. And this is this is my value ad. Everything else like agent gets it. >> It just can't come up with it. But it totally gets it and understands why it's done in certain way etc. So like my contribution is kind of like these few bits, but everything else in terms of like the education that goes on after that is like not my domain anymore. So maybe yeah, it's like education kind of changes in those ways where you kind of have to infuse the few bits that you feel strongly about the curriculum or the the best the better way of explaining it or something like that. The things that agents can't do is your job now. The things that agents can do, they can probably do better than you or like very soon. And so you should um be strategic about what you're actually spending time on. >> Well, we appreciate the few things. Thank you, Andre. >> Okay. >> Find us on Twitter at no prior pod. Subscribe to our YouTube channel if you want to see our faces. Follow the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or wherever you listen. That way, you get a new episode every week. And sign up for emails or find transcripts for every episode at no-briers.com.

